This document was supplied for free educational purposes.
Unless it is in the public domain, it may not be sold for profit
or hosted on a webserver without the permission of the
copyright holder.
If you find it of help to you and would like to support the
ministry of Theology on the Web, please consider using the
links below:
https://www.buymeacoffee.com/theology
https://patreon.com/theologyontheweb
PayPal https://paypal.me/robbradshaw
TRANSLATIONS OF EARLY DOCUMENTS
SERIES II
HELLENISTIC-JEWISH TEXTS
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
THE
LETTER OF ARIS1'EAS
TRANSLATED
WITH AN APPENDIX OF ANCIENT EVIDENCE
ON THE ORIGIN OF THE SEPTUAGINT
BY
H. Sr. J. THACKERAY, M.A.
GRIN FIELD LECTURER ON THE SEPTUAGINT IN THE UNIVERSITY OJ' OXFORD
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
LONDON: 68, HAYMARKET, S.W. r.
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
1918
First Edition r9r7
EDITORS' PREFACE
THE object of this series of translations is primarily to
furnish students with short, cheap, and handy text-books,
which, it is hoped, will facilitate the study of the particular
texts in class under competent teachers. But it is also
hoped that the volumes will be acceptable to the general
reader who may be interested in the subjects with which
they deal. It has been thought advisable, as a general
rule, to restrict the notes and comments to a small com
pass; more especially as, in mo~t cases, excellent works
of a more elaborate character are available. Indeed, it
is much to be desired that these translations may have
the effect of inducing readers to study the larger works.
Our principal aim, in a· word, is to make some difficult
texts, important for the study of Christian origins, more
generally accessible in faithful and scholarly translations.
In most cases these texts are not available in a cheap
and handy form. In one or two cases texts have been
included of books which are available in the official
Apocrypha ; but in every such case reasons exist for
putting forth these texts in a new translation, with an
Introduction, in this Series.
W. 0. E. 0ESTERLEY.
G. H. Box.
V
INTRODUCTION
CONTENTS
THE document known as the Letter of Aristeas pur
ports to be a contemporary record, by a Greek holding a
high position at the court of Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-
247 ll.c.), of the translation of the Hebrew Pentateuch
into Greek, undertaken at the instance of the royal
librarian, Demetrius of Phalerum. The familiar name
"the Septuagint," by which the Greek Old Testament as
a whole came to be known, owes its origin to the story
here told of the seventy-two translators of the Law. The
narrative is communicated in the form of a letter from
Aristeas to his brother Philocrates. Aristeas claims to
have been a member of the embassy sent from Alexandria
to Jerusalem to obtain a copy of the Law and the services
of a company of Palestinian translators. The letter is
discursive, ranging over a variety of topics ; the descrip
tion of the actual work of translation being compressed
into the closing sections. The following is an analysis of
the contents :-
I. Introductory address to Philocrates, §§ r-8.
II. The origin of the scheme and preliminary pro
ceedings, §§ 9-51.
(a) The proposal of the king's librarian,§§ 9-11.
(b) The emancipation of the Jewish slaves in
Egypt,§§ u-27.
vii
viii INTRODUCTION
(c) The librarian's memorial, §§ 28-33.
(d) The correspondence between Ptolemy and
Eleazar, with the names of the trans
lators, §§ 34-51.
II I. Description of the royal presents to Eleazar,
§§ 51-82.
IV. Description of Jerusalem a_nd its vicinity,§§ 83-120.
(a) The temple: entrance, veil, altar, §§ 84-87.
(b) The temple water supply, §§ 88-91.
(c) The priests arid the public services,§§ 92-95.
(d) The high priest's vestments, §§ 96-99.
(e) The citadel and its guards, §§ 100-104.
(/) The city and its streets, §§ 105-106.
(g) Small and large cities-Jerusalem and
Alexandria-contrasted, §§ 107-1 r 1.
(h) The country and its produce: harbours,
rivers, mountain ranges, §§ 112-II8.
(t) The mines of Arabia, §§ u9-120.
V. Eleazar's farewell to the translators,§§ 120-127.
VI. Eleazar's apology for the Jewish Law,§§ 128-171.
VII. Reception of the translators at Alexandria, §§ 172-
181.
VIII. The seven days' banquet in honour of the trans
lators, §§ 182-186.
IX. The wise answers of the translators to the king's
hard questions, §§ 187-300.
X. The translation and its reception, §§ 301-316.
XI. The departure of the translators, §§ 3 r 7-3 2 r.
XII. Concluding address to Philocrates, § 322.
CHARACTER, DATE AND CREDIBILITY OF THE
NARRATIVE
That the Letter is not what it professes to be, a con
temporary record of a Greek who played a prominent
INTRODUCTION lX
part in the actions described, has long been recognized.
In various ways the writer betrays himself.
He was not a contemporary of Ptolemy Philadelphus.
On two occasions he momentarily forgets his rtJle and
reveals the interval of time which has elapsed since the
age of that monarch. He alludes to the scrupuJous care
with which "all business used to be transacted by these
kings" (§ 28), as though he were looking back over an
epoch of a long dynasty of Ptolemies. Again, he tells us
that the arrangements made at the Alexandrian court for
the entertainment of foreigners " may still be seen to this
day"(§ 182).
He is not a veracious historian. Where his references
to historical characters and events are open to control,
he is found guilty of anachronisms and inaccuracies.
He represents Deme!rius, who, as we learn from other
sources, was banished from Alexandria early in the reign
of Philadelphus, as the king's confidential friend and
librarian, upon whose initiative the translation was under
taken. We have no other evidence that the philosopher
Menedemus of Eretria (§ 201) ever visited Alexandria.
In the allusion to a naval victory of Ptolemy over Anti
gonus Gonatas (§ 1 So) either a decisive defeat of the
Egyptian navy at the battle of Cos (c. 260 B.c.) has
been transformed into a victory, or the reference is to an
actual victory at Andros many years later (c. 245 B.c.);
in either case there is anachronism, both battles having
occurred long after the death of Demetrius. The state
ments with regard to Theopompus (§ 314) and Theodectes
(§ 316) are doubtless equally untrustworthy. The writer
himself in one place anticipates the incredibility with
which his story will be received, and finds it necessary to
appeal to the unimpeachable evidence of his authorities
(§§ 2 96 ff.).
X INTRODUCTION
Finally-and this is the main count in the indictment
the whole tone of the book proclaims the writer to be a
Jew and not, as he would have us believe (§ 16), a Greek.
The apologetic tendency is manifest throughout. His
main object is to commend and magnify the Jewish
nation, with its laws and institutions, in the eyes of the
Greek public for which he writes, by narrating the honour
bestowed upon it by a Greek monarch and the praise
accorded to Jewish wisdom by heathen philosophers
(§§ 200 f., 235). He is at pains to explain the absence
of any mention of the Jewish Law in the Greek historians
and poets(§§ 31,312 ff.) The apologetic tendency is most
apparent in the long exposition given by E.leazar of "the
natural ( or 'inward' ) meaning of the Law" (§ 17 1) with
regard to clean and unclean food : a section which is
penned with the intention of satisfying a supposed wide
spread "curiosity" (§ r 28) and counteracting fallacious
and long "exploded" views on the subject (§ 144).
The book, in short, belongs to the fairly large class of
works which Schiirer designates "Jewish propaganda
under a heathen mask." In Prof. Andrews' words, "it
is not too much to say that the writer's one object is to
demonstrate the supremacy of the Jewish people-the
Jewish priesthood, the Jewish law, the Jewish philosophy
and the Jewish Bible."
On the other hand, criticism of the work has in recent
years entered on a new phase, and in one direction has
to some extent rehabilitated our author. As long ago as
1870, when the importance of the Egyptian papyri was
not fully recognized and the recovered documents were
few, Prof. Lumbroso wrote, 1 perhaps with some slight
exaggeration, "There is not a court title, an institution,
• Recherches sur I' lconomie po!itique de l' Egypte sous les Lagides,
p. xiii.
INTRODUCTION XI
a law, a magistracy, an office, a technical term, a formula,
a remarkable turn of language in this letter, there is no
piece of evidence of Aristeas concerning the civil history
of the epoch, which is not found registered in the papyri
or the inscriptions and confirmed by them." This state
ment is, on the whole, borne out by the much larger
collections of papyri now available, with this important
reservation that the titles, formulas, etc., appear, in
some instances at least, to be those of the later, not the
earlier, Ptolemaic age. Thull, the phrase "if it be thy
good pleasure" (§ 3 2 ), where the pronoun is unrepre
sented in the Greek, is not found in the papyri before
163 B.C., nor the use of the plural in the phrase "of the
chief of the bodyguards" (§ 40) before 148 n.c. The
author, it must be admitted, is thoroughly conversant
with the technical and official language of Alexandria
and the court, and it is probable that his interesting
incidental allusions to Alexandrian life and customs are
equally trustworthy: the measures taken to counteract
the injury to agriculture, produced by migration from
country to town (§§ rn9 ff.), the treatment of informers
(§ 167; cf. § 25), the reception of foreign embassies(§ 182 ).
In these matters the information which he supplies may
be used to supplement, where it is not confirmed by, that
furnished by the papyri.
If the writer is at home in Alexandrian matters, what
weight may be attached to his description of Palestine
(§§ 83-120)? Quaint as may be his ideas on e. g. the
course of the Jordan (§ r 17), his description of Jerusalem
itself has the vivid touch of an eyewitness. Surely, we
are inclined to say, this man was a spectator of the
waving curtain or veil at the entrance of the Temple
(§ 86), and was given proof on the spot of the existence
of the underground cisterns beneath and around the
Xll INTRODUCTION
Temple area (§§ 89-91), of which we learn from other
sources. Sir George Adam Smith, indeed, regards the
Letter as "the work, perhaps about 200, of a Jewish
writer, well acquainted with the city and the land";
"standing upon the Akra . . . this observer had the
bulk of the town before him on the South-West and
North-West Hills," and his description (§ 105) is given
"with remarkable fidelity to their configuration." 1 The
date here suggested (after Schurer) is largely based on
the picture presented in this section of the political·
position of Palestine and its relation to Egypt. The
fortress of Jerusalem is still in possession of the Jews.
Alexandrians are allowed to enter the country and its
capital without molestation, and "the Jewish people and
their high priest appear as almost politically independent"
(Schurer). This, according to Schurer, presupposes the
period before the conquest of Palestine by the Seleucid
dynasty in 198 B.C. as the date of writing.
This brings us to the question of date, as to which
there is a considerable diversity of opinion. The Letter
was used by Josephus, and was almost certainly known
to Philo (3ee Appendix, pp. 96 ff.). How much earlier is
it? Three dates have hitherto been proposed: ( r) about
200 B.C. (Schiirer); (2) about rno B.c., or more precisely
between 96 and 63 B.c. and nearer the former date
(Wendland); (3) more than a century later, under
Tiberius or Caligula (Gratz, Willrich).
The last-named date is certainly too late, and the
arguments for bringing the work down to the Imperial
age, ~. g. a supposed reference to the Roman delatores
(§ 167 ), are unconvincing. The description of Palestine,
even if not the first-hand work of the author, could
1 Jerusalem, i. 390; ii. 440.
INTRODUCTION
hardly have stood in its present form after the Roman
occupation of Palestine. Nor would the story have
been reproduced by Philo if not composed before
A.D. 33.
On the other hand, Schi.irer's date appears to be rather
too early. The sketch of Palestine and the Holy City
may have been taken over by our author from an earlier
writer, Hecataeus of Abdera, to whom he once (§ 31)
expressly refers, and of whom there is reason to think
that he made a more extensive use. Schiirer's other
argument is derived from a passage of Aristobulus, who,
addressing a Ptolemy commonly identified with Philo
metor (182-146 B.C.), repeats the statement that the
Pentateuch was translated under Philadelphus at the
instance of Demetrius Phalereus (see Appendix (5) p. 95).
This, in Schiirer's opinion, implies that Aristobulus
was acquainted with the Aristeas story. The genuine
ness of the Aristobulus passage has, however, been ques
tioned by many recent critics. It is hard to believe that
a fictitious story, a.s Schurer admits that of Aristeas to
be, could have gained credence within little more than
half a century after the period to which it relates.
On the whole, an intermediate date, about rzo-80 B.c.,
appears most probable. As already stated, the formulas,
etc., employed are those of the later Ptolemaic age. The
later Maccabaean age, or the end of the second century
B.c., is suggested by some of the translators' names
(e. g. Jason). Some of Ptolemy's questions indicate a
tottering dynasty (§ 187, etc.). The writer appears to
borrow his name from a Jewish historian of the second
century B.C., and to wish to pass off the latter's history
as his own (§ 6). The prologue to the Greek Ecclesi
asticus (after 132 B.c.) ignores the Aristeas story, though
too much must not be made of this argumentum e
XIV INTRODUCTION
silenti'o. The probable allusion (§§ 3 ro f.) to attempts
which had been made to improve on the work of the
translators, with the imprecation upon the offender,
points to a growing divergence of text which the writer
desired to check; with this should be compared the
pointed reference to a difference between the Greek text
and the Hebrew in a passage of Exodus (§ 5 7) . Allu
sions to current criticisms of the Pentateuch (§§ r 28, 144)
presuppose a familiarity with it on the part of non
Jewish readers, only explicable if the LXX had long
been current. All these facts point to a date further
removed from the age of Philadelphus than that which
Schurer would adopt On the other hand, certain details
in the Greek style and orthography seem to preclude a
date much later than roo B.C.
We have, then, to deal with a work which in some
respects is obviously fictitious, and in others appears
deserving of respect. Behind the romantic and apolo
getic framework there lies, no doubt, an element of
truth. The story appears to be based, in part at least,
on ancient popular tradition. Philo tells us (see Appendix,
p. 100) that in his day the translation was celebrated by
an annual festival, attended by Jews and others, and
held on the beach of the island of Pharos.1 It is im
probable that an artificial production like the Aristeas
Letter should have occasioned such an anniversary. On
the contrary, this piece of evidence suggests the existence
of an independent tradition, and that one object of our
Letter may have been to supply a demand for a con-
1 Conversely, the Palestinian Jews observed as a fast day the 8th
Tebeth {December-January), on which "the Tornh was written in
Greek in the days of King Tolmai, and darkness came upon the
world for three days" {Appendix (1), p. 89).
INTRODUCTION xv
nected account of the events commemorated at the
festival.
We are left with the difficult task of attempting to dis
entangle truth from fiction in the main narrative. The
various questions raised are fully discussed by Dr. Swete
(Introd. to 0. T., chap. i). The following statements in
the Letter appear deserving of credit. ( r) The Pentateuch
forms a, distinct corpus within the Greek Bible_; it
was translated first and, in view of the homogeneity of
its style, as a whole. ( 2) The translation was produced
at Alexandria, as is concln~ively proved by the Egyptian
influence on its lar.guage, to which the new found papyri
furnish the closest parallel. (3) The Greek Pentateuch
goes back at least as far as the middle of the third
centur-y B.c. (The Greek Genesis was towards the end
of that century used by the Hellenist Demetrius.) The
style is akin to that of the earlier papyri, and reflects
the period of the dawn of the Koiv~ when certain forms
were in use which had already become obsolete in New
Testament times. (4) It is not unlikely that the task
was undertaken by a company of translators, though the
traditional number (70 or 72) is certainly legendary. A
parallel may be found in a group of prophetical books
(Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Minor Prophets), where indications
have been traced in the Greek of collaboration and a
division of labour between members of a later compat_1y.
(5) The Hebrew rolls were not improbably imported
from Palestine. (6) Possibly Philadelphus, the patron
of literature, with his known tastes and his "syncretistic
temperament" (Swete) may have countenanced the work.
On the other hand, the assertion that it owed its
inception wholly to him and his librarian is incredible.
It is known that Demetrius did not fill the office of
librarian under that monarch. If he played any part
xvi INTRODUCTION
in the work it must have been in the reign of the pre
decessor of Philadelphus, Ptolemy I (Soter), and Dr.
Swete is inclined to believe that the project may have
been discussed by him with the royal founder of the
Alexandrian library, "and that the work was really due
to his suggestion, though his words did not bear fruit
until after his death" (Introd., p. rg). There may even
be an element of truth in the tradition of an older and
less careful translation prior to the time of Philadelphus
(cf. Arist. §§ 30, 314). But the existing version is written
in the vernacular, not in a literary style suitable to -a
work produced under royal patronage.
Again, the story of the importation of Palestinian trans
lators is doubtless fictitious. Dr. Swete acutely observes
that Aristeas, in relating that the translation .was read to
and welcomed by the Jewish community before being
presented to the king (§§ 308 ff.), unconsciously reveals
its true ongm. It was produced, we may be sure, to
meet their own needs by the large Greek-speaking Jewish
colony at A)exandria. Lectionary requirements and a
demand that the Law should be read in the synagogues
in a. tongue "understanded of the people " were, we have
reason to conjecture, the originating impulse.
LATER ACCRETIONS TO THE LEGEND 1
From being the Bible of the Jewish Dispersion the
Greek Old Testament became the Bible of the early
Church. The traditional story of its birth thus fitly finds
a place in a series of documents illustrative of Christian
origins. The Church Fathers accepted this story without
suspicion and amplified it. Beside these later fabrica
tions the older narrative appears comparatively rational.
The translators, it was now asserted, worked independ-
1 See Lhe Appendix.
INTRODUCTION xvu
ently in separate cells and produced identical versions,
Ptolemy proposing this test of their trustworthiness
(contrast Arist. § 302, "arriving at an agreement on each
point by comparing each other's work"). So say, e.g.,
Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria and the authors of the
Chronicon Paschale and the Cohortatio ad Graccos (ps.
Justin). The last writer asserts that he had seen the
cells and heard the tradition on the spot. According
to a modified form of the legend, the translators worked
in pairs, in thirty-six cells ; so Epiphanius and later
writers. Epiphanius enters into great detail. The trans
lators were, he says, locked up in skylighted cells in
pairs, with attendants and shorthand writers; eath
pair was entrusted with one book, the books were
then circulated and thirty-six identical versions of the
whole Bible, canonical and apocryphal books, were pro
duced ; Ptolemy wrote two letters, one asking for the
original Scriptures, the second for translators. The story
of the two embassies appears already in the second
century in Justin's Apology; the extension of the trans
lators' work to the Prophets or the whole Bible recurs
in the two Cyrils and in Chrysostom. Lastly, the
miraculous agreement of the translators proved them
to be no less inspired than the original authors; so
Irenaeus and others, Philo having already led the
way.
It is needless to dwell on these later inventions, the
outcome, it seems, of a steadily growing oral tradition
at Alexandria; Jerome justly held them up to ridicule,
contrasting them with the older and more sober narrative.
But a word may be said on a few points. ( 1) Cave
dwellings in the island of Pharos may well account for
the legend of the cells. ( 2) An ingenious explanation
of the origin of the legend of the miraculous consensus
B
xviii INTRODUCTION
of the seventy (o r seventy-two) translators has been found
(Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible, iv. 439 a) in a passage
in Exodus xxiv (LXX) to which Epiphanius expressly
refers. We them read of seventy elders of Israel who,
with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, form a link between
Moses and the people. They do not follow Moses to
the top of the mount; they ascend but a little way and
are bidden to worship from afar. According to the
Greek text, "they saw the place where the God of Israel
stood . . . and of the elect of Israel not one perished "
(v. I I), i. e. they were privileged to escape the usual
death-penalty for a vision of the Deity. But the verb
used for "perish" (diaphonein) was uncommon in this
sen_se ; "not one disagreed " would be the more obvious
meaning. Hence, it may be, arose both the number
seventy (or seventy-two) and the legend of the super
natural agreement of the translators, the latter-day inter
mediaries between Moses and Israel of the Dispersion.
When the translations were recited, "no difference was
discoverable," writes Epiphanius, using the kindred word
diaphonia. (3) An element of truth perhaps underlies
one item in Epiphanius' generally incredible account,
viz. the working of the translators in pairs. The Greek
translations of Jeremiah, Ezekiel and the Minor Prophets,
judged by their style, form a group and were probably
produced en bloc by a company of translators. The trans
lations of Jeremiah and Ezekiel fall into two nearly equal
parts, a change of translators occurring in the middle of
each book, while in other parts of the LXX a variety
of practice in certain orthographical details inrlicates a
similar division for clerical purposes. There was, it
seems, a primitive custom of transcribing each book on
two separate rolls, and in two books at least the practice
goes right back to the time when the translation was made.
INTRODUCTION xix
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The most recent editions of the Greek text are those::
of P. Wendland (Leipzig, 1900, in the Teubner series of
classical texts; especially valuable for its Appendix, con
taining the evidence of Jewish and Patristic writers on
the origin of the Greek version, and its full Index of
words) and H. St. J. Thackeray, printed as an Appendix
to Dr. Swete's Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek
(Cambridge, 1900, etc.).
An English translation, with introduction and com
mentary, by Prof. H. T. Andrews, is included in vol. ii
of Charles' Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old
Testament (Oxford, 1913); a German version by .P.
Wendland in vol. ii of Kautzsch's Apokryphen and
Pseudepigraphen des Allen Testaments (Tiibingen, 1900).
An English version by the present translator, which
appeared first in the Jewish Quarterly Review (April
1903) and then as a separate reprint (Macmillan, 1904),
is superseded by the present work, except for some notes
for which room could not here be found.
An incomplete critical edition with Latin comment;try
on §§ r-51, by L. Mendelssohn appeared in 1897. Of
critical studies special mention may be made of Swete's
Intr(!duction, part i, chap. i, and an essay by I. Abrahams
in the Jewish Quarterly Review for January 1902; an
article by P. Wendland is contributed to the Jewish
Encyclopaedia. For further literature reference may be
made to Schiirer's History of the Jewish People, div. ii,
vol. iii, 310 (1897).
The present translation is made from the text in Dr.
Swete's Introduction, Wendland's edition being consulted
throughout. With the kind permission of the former
editors (Mr. C. G. Montefiore and Mr. I. Abrahams)
XX INTRODUCTION
and publishers (Messrs. Macmillan) of the Jewish
Quarterly Review, it is based on the translation which
appeared in that journal ; but the whole has been care
fully revised, with much assistance in particular from the
recent version by Prof. Andrews. The translator has
also to acknowledge the permission kindly granted by
the publishers of TJ1e International Standard Bible
Encyclopa:di'a (Howard-Severance Company, Chicago,
r 91 5) to make use of his article, "Septuagint," contained
therein. The sections into which the text is divided are
those of Wendland; these are introduced into the later
editions of the Cambridge text.
The Appendix contains a selection of the principal
passages in Jewish and Christian writings relating to the
origin of the version of the Seventy. These are, it is
believed, here collected for the first time in an English
dress. For the Rabbinic passages, which were not in
cluded in Wendland's Testimonia, the translator has to
acknowledge the kind assistance of one of the Editors of
this series, Canon Box.
As regards the use of italics, the principle of the
Revisers of the Old Testament has in general been fol
lowed, viz. "where any doubt existed as to the exact
rendering .. , all words which have been added in order
to give completeness to the English expression are printed
in italic type, so that the reader by omitting them may
be able to see how far their insertion is justified by the
words of the original."
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
(I) INTRODUCTORY ADDRESS TO
PHILOCRA TES
As the story of our deputation to Eleazar, the high 1
priest of the Jews, is worth the telling, and because thou,
Philocrates, hast set thy heart, as thou art constantly re
minding me, on learning the motives and purpose of our
mission, I have endeavoured to give thee a clear account
of the matter. I know that love of learning of thine;
and it is indeed man's highest task " ever to make 2
addition to his store of learning and acquirements," 1
either by the study of history or by actual experience of
affairs. The soul is thus built up in purity, by taking up
into itself what is best, and with piety, supreme above
all, as its aim, is assisted in its pursuit by an unerring
guide.
It was my 2 devotion to the careful study of religion 3
whic;h ied me2 to offer my2 services for the embassy to
the man I have mentioned, who, owing to his virtuous
character and exalted position, is held in high honour
both by his countrymen and by the rest of the world, and
is in possession of documents of the greatest service to his
nation, whether at home or abroad, for the translation of
the divine law, because it exists in their country written
on parchment in Hebrew characters. This embassy then 4
1 These words form an iambic line in the Greek, and are probably
a quotation fro1n a lost tragedy. a Lit. " our, u "us, i, " our."
21
22 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
I 1 undertook with enthusiasm, after finding an opportunity
of approaching the king on the subject of the men who
were removed to Egypt from Judaea by the king's father,
when first he took ever the city 2 and the government
of Egypt. This story also it is worth while my telling
5 thee. For I am persuaded that thou above all men,
with thy leanings towards the holiness and the senti
ments of the men who live in accordance with the
holy law, wilt gladly listen to the story about them
which I 1 purpose to narrate, having but recently come
over from the island 3 to us and being anxious to
6 hear whatever makes for the soul's edification. On a
former occasion, too, I sent thee a description of matters
in my opinion worthy of record concerning the Jewish
nation, which I 1 obtained from the high priests, the most
7 learned body in that most learned land of Egypt.' It is
right to communicate such things to thee with thy eager
ness to learn what may benefit the mind; very willingly
would I impart them to all who are like-minded with thee,
but chiefly to thee; so sincere are thy principles, and not
only does thy character shew thee to be my brother by
birth, but in thy striving after goodness thou art at one
8 with me.11 For neither the attraction of gold nor any other
of the objects that the vain-glorious hold in honour confers
the same benefit as a cultured training and the pains ex
pended thereon. But, not to weary you with too long an
introduction, I 1 will resume the thread of the narrative.6
1 Lit. "we." 2 Alexandria.
3 Probably Cyprus is meant.
4 Possibly the writer wishes to identify himself with the historian
Aristeas, who wrote a work about the Jews, a fragment of which is
preserved by Eusebius.
6 Lit. "with us." Perhaps with a slight transposition of words
we should read, "and nut only art thou my brother by birth, but also
in thy character, which in its striving after goodness is alcin to ours,"
s (::f, i Mace. ii. J2, · ·
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 23
(II) ORIGIN OF THE SCHEME AND
PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS
(a) THE PROPOSAL OF THE KING'S LIBRARIAN
Demetrius of Phalerum,1. as keeper of the king's 9
library, received large grants of public money with a
view to his collecting, if possible, all the books in the
world ; and by purchases and transcriptions he to the
best of his ability carried the king's purpose into execution.
Being asked once in my 2 presence, about how many thou- 1o
sands of books were already collected, he replied" More
than two hundred thousand,3 0 king; and I will ere long
make diligent search for the remainder, so that a total of
half a million may be reached. I am informed that the
Jews also have certain laws which are deserving of
transcription and a place in thy library." "What is to II
hinder thee, then," replied the king, "in this task? For
all the necessary means are at thy service." And De
metrius answered, "Translation is also required. For in
the Jews' land they use a peculiar script (just as Egyptians
have their system 4 of letters) and speak a peculiar
language. It is commonly thought that they use the
Syrian 5 language, but this is an error; it is another
dialect." And when the king had learnt all the facts, he
gave command that a letter should be written to the
high priest of the Jews, in order that the proposal above
mentioned might be carried into effect.
1 Demetrius lived from about 345 13.C. to about 283 B.C. The
last part of his life was spent at the court_ of Ptolemy Soter, but he
was out of favour with Ptolemy Philadelphus and banished by him.
Ue was never the royal librarian.
vr.
• Lit. "our." a "tens of thousands."
• Lit. ''arrangement.'' • i.e. Aramaig.
24 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
(b) THE EMANCIPATION OF THE JEWISH SLAVES.
1 2 And now thought I was the opportunity for introducing
a matter about which I had often made request to Sosi
bius of Tarentum and Andreas, the heads of the body
guard, namely, the liberation of the Jews who had been
carried away from J udaea by the king's father. For he,
after overrunning the whole of Coele-Syria and Phoenicia,
assisted by good fortune and his own prowess, transplanted
some and made prisoners of others, terrorizing and re
ducing the whole country to submission. It was on this
occasion that he carried away more than a hundred
13 thousand persons from the Jews' country into Egypt, of
which number he armed about thirty thousand picked
men and settled them in the fortresses in the country.
(Many Jews had already before this entered the country
along with the Persian, 1 and others had at a still earlier
time been sent out as auxiliaries to fight in the army of
Psammetichus 2 against the king of the Ethiopians; but
these immigrants were not so large a body as those whom
14 Ptolemy, son of Lagus, introduced.) Well, as we said
before, he selected those who were best fitted .for service
by age and physique, and armed them, but the remaining
mass, those who were too old or too young for service,
and the women as well, he reduced to bondage, not of
his own free will, but rather compelled thereto by the
soldiers, who c!azined them in return for the services which
they had rendered in action.
Having, therefore, found some pretext for their release,
1 Cambyses, who conquered Egypt in 525 B.C.
2 Psammetichns was king of Egypt from about 671 to 617 E.c.;
he was the first king of Egypt to employ Greek mercenaries in
foreign campaigns (Hdt. II. 151 ff.). Others think that Psarnmis
or Psammetichus II, a~ he is sometimes called, is here intended.
He became king of Egypt in 6o1 B.c., and waged war against
Ethiopia (Hdt. II. 159-161).
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 25
as already explained, I 1 addressed the king somewhat as
follows: "It would surely be unreasonable, 0 king, to 5
1
let our deeds give the lie to our words. For, as the laws
which we are proposing not only to transcribe but also to
translate are binding on all Jews, what justification shall
we find for our mission, whilst large numbers of the race
continue in slavery in thy kingdom? Nay, with a perfect
and bounteous heart release those who are held fast in
miseries, since the same God who gave them their law
directs thy kingdom, as my research has taught me.
For the God who sees and created all things whom 6
1
they worship is He whom all men worship, and we too,
0 king, though we address Him by other names as Zeus
and Dis ; and by these names they of old time not in
appropriately signified that He, through whom all things
receive their life and being, is the Director and Lord of
all. 2 Outdo, then, all men in mag.nanimity, and set at
liberty those who are held in bondage."
The king kept silence for a while, and I 1 inwardly 17
prayed to God to dispose his mind to a general release.
(For the human race, being God's creation, is swayed
and moved by Him ; and therefore I called with many
and divers prayers upon Him that rules the heart, that
he might be constrained to fulfil my desire. For I bad 18
a good hope, in bringing forward a proposal concerning
the deliverance of men,3 that God would cause the fulfil
ment of my desires; for when men piously think that
they are working for righteousness and the furtherance of
good deeds, it is God Almighty who directs their actions
1 Lit." we." ,
2 The two accusative forms of Zevs, viz. Zijva and t>.!a, are here
derived from (ijv (to live), and l'iid (through). This etymology is
found in Orphic and other writings ; see the Orphic fragment quoted
by Blass on Acts xvii. 28.
3 Cf. § 292. It is unnecessary to read " the men."
26 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
and designs.) But the king, raising his head and looking
19 at me with a cheerful countenance, said, "How many
thousands 1 dost thou suppose there will be? " And
Andreas, who was standing close by, replied, "A little over
a hundred thousand." "Of a truth," said he, "it is but
a small request which Aristeas makes of us." But Sosi
bius and some others who were present said, "It is
indeed an action worthy of thy magnanimity to offer the
release of these men as a thank-offering to the Most
High God. For, as thou hast been most highly honoured
by the Almighty and exalted above thy forefathers, so is
it fitting that thou ~houldest make the very highest of
20 thank-offerings." And he, greatly delighted, gave orders
that the redemption money should be added to the soldiers'
pay: for every slave the owner should receive twenty
drachmas: a decree should be published on the subject,
and the registers should be drawn up forthwith. So
magnificent was his zeal, and thus did God fulfil our
whole desire, constraining him to liberate not only those
who had entered the country with his father's army, but
also any who were there before or had since been
introduced into the kingdom.2 It was pointed out that
the donation would exceed four hundred talents.
21 And I think that it will not be without use to have on
record here a copy of the decree. For the munificence
of the king, who was empowered by God to be the means
of deliverance to vast multitudes, will thus be made far
clearer and more evident. It ran thus :-
.22 "BY THE KING'S DECREE.
"All persons who served in the campaign of our father
against the regions of Syria and Phoenicia and in the
1 Gr. "tens of thousands."
ll fossibly some words have here fallen out in the MSS,
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 27
invasion of the territory of the Jews, and became posses
sors of Jewish slaves, and have brought these over into
the city of Alexandria and the country of Egypt, or have
sold them to others - likewise also if any such were
beforetime in the country or have since been introduced
-the owners shall straightway release them. Compen
sation shall forthwith be paid for every slave twenty
drachmas, to the soldiers with their pay, and to the rest
at the royal bank. We consider that the making of these 23
persons prisoners was contrary to the will of our father
and to justice, and that the spoliation of their country
and the transportation of the Jews into Egypt were due
to military recklessness. The spoil which accrued to
the soldiers on the field of battle should have sufficed;
to reduce the people to subjection in addition was wholly
inequitable, Forasmuch then as it is our recognized 24
practice to award justice to all men, but chiefly to those
who are unreasonably oppressed, and we do always strive
to deal fairly with all men in accordance with the dictates
of justice and piety, we have decreed that the owners of
all Jewish persons who are held in bondage anywhere1
in any manner within the kingdom, shall on receipt of
the prescribed sum release them. No one shall in any
way be dilatory in the discharge of these duties, but
within three days from the date of publication of this
decree they shall hand in their lists to those who are set
over this business, and shall also at once produce the
persons. For we are resolved that it is expedient for 25
ourselves and for the realm that this matter be accom
plished. Any who will may give information concern
ing defaulters, on condition that the informer shall
become owner of the person if found guilty, but the
~mended text,
28 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
property of such persons shall be confiscated to the
royal purse."
26 When the decree was submitted to be read over to
the king, containing all the rest with the exception of
the words, "Also if any such were beforetime in the
country or have since been introduced," the king him
self out of his munificence and magnanimity appended
this clause. He also gave orders to assign a grant of the
moneys in a lump sum to the paymasters of the forces
27 and the royal bankers. The matter was thus decided
and the decree was ratified within seven days. The dona
tion amounted to over six hundred and sixty1 talents; for
many children at the breast were also liberated along
with the mothers. When the further question was re•
ferred, whether twenty drachmas should be given for
these as well, the king ordered that this also should be
done. So thoroughly in every detail did he give effect
to the decision.
(c) THE LIBRARIAN'S MEMORIAL.
28 And when this business was ended, he ordered Deme
trius to submit a statement concerning the transcrip
tion of the Jewish books. For all business used to
be transacted by these kings 2 by means of decrees and
with great precaution, and nothing was done in an off
hand or casual manner. And therefore have I set down
here copies of the memorial and the letters, and the
number of the presents sent, and the nature of each, for
every one of these excelled in magnificence and technical
skill. And the following is a copy of the memorial :-
1 To sephus writes, "over 460 talents."
• The writer here betrays that he lived at a later age than that
which he is describing.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 29
"To the great king from Demetrius-In obedience 29
to thy order, 0 king, that the books which are wanting
to complete the library should be added to the collec
tion, and that those which are defective should be duly
repaired, I have expended great care upon these matters
and now submit a reference to thee. The books of the 30
Jewish law with some few others are wanting. They
are written in Hebrew letters and in the Hebrew tongue,
and have been interpreted 1 somewhat 2 carelessly and
do not represent the original text, according to inform
ation supplied by the experts, because they have never
received a king's fostering care. It is necessary that these
books too should in an emended form find a place in 31
thy library, because this code of laws, in that it is divine,
is full of wisdom 3 and faultless. For this reason authors,
poets, and the mass of the historians have abstained from
any mention of the books aforesaid and of the men who -
have lived [a nd are living] 4 in accordance with them,
because the views presented in them have a certain
sanctity and holiness, as says Hecataeus of Abdera.5 If
then it be thy good pleasure, 0 king, a letter shall be 32
written to the high priest at Jerusalem, bidding him send
six elders from each tribe, men of the highest repute
and versed in their country's law, in order that we may
test wherein the more part agree, and so obtaining an
1 If ,r«r,/iµana, is correctly rendered, there appears to he a
reference to an earlier Greek translation of the Law than the LXX
(cf. § 314). Aristobulus in a well-known passage refers to such a
translation (see Appendix, p. 95, Swete, Introd. to 0. T., p. I f.).
:f,e,r,/iµawra, may, however, merely mean "committed to writing."
The explanation of Diels that incorrect vocalization is re/erred
to is ingenious.
1 Or "very."
3 Lit. "most" (or "more")" philosophical."
4 Perhaps a gloss.
5 A contemporary of Alexander the Great and Ptolemy I and
author of a history of Egypt. Cf. §§ 312 ff.
30 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
accurate translation may deposit it in a conspicuous
place 1 in a manner worthy of the undertaking and of thy
33 gracious will. Fare ever well ! " 2 When this memorial
had been presented, the king ordered that a letter
should be written to Eleazar on these matters, informing
him also of the emancipation of the captives. He pre
sented also towards the construction of bowls and vials
and a table and cups for libations fifty talents' weight of
gold and seventy talents of silver and of precious stones
a great number (enjoining the treasurers to leave to the
craftsmen the selection of such materials as they might
desire), and for sacrifices and other purposes as much as
an hundred talents in money.
(d) THE LETTERS OF PTOLEJ\IY AND ELEAZAR
34 I 8 will give thee an account of the construction of the
gifts when I 3 have set out copies of the letters. The
tenour of the king's letter was as follows :-
35 " King Ptolemaeus to Eleazar the high priest greeting
and health.
"Forasmuch as there are many Jews settled in our
realm who were forcibly removed from Jerusalem by the
Persians at the time of their power, and others who
36 entered Egypt as captives in the train of our father-of
these he enrolled many in the army, giving them higher
than the ordinary pay, and in like manner, having proved
1 i. e. in the Alexandrian library (cf. § 38). But the sense is
doubtful ; possibly we should translate "may make the meaning
plain."
2 E,iT6x .., as Mahaffy has shown, is the regular formula at the
end of an address from a subordinate to his superior, and is therefore
correctly used here. A per,on addressing his subordinate or his
equal uses lppw<To (so in the letters that follow, §§ 40, 46).
• Lit. "we.n
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 31
the loyalty of those who were already in the country, he
placed under their charge the fortresses which he built,
that the native Egyptians might 1 be intimidated by
them ; and we too since ascending the throne meet all
men, but chiefly thy countrymen, in a very friendly
spirit-we, then, have given liberty to more than a 37
hundred thousand captives, paying their owners the
proper market price, and making good any wrong which
they may have suffered through the passions of the mob.
Our intent in this was to do a pious action and to
dedicate a thank-offering to the Most High God, who has
preserved our kingdom in peace and in the highest
esteem throughout the whole world. Moreover, we
have drafted into the army those who are in the prime
of life, and to such as are fitted to be attached to our
person and deserving of the confidence of court have we
assigned offices of state. Now since we desire to confer 38
a favour not on these only, but on all Jews throughout
the world and on future generations, it is our will that
your Law be translated from the Hebrew tongue in use
among you 2 into Greek, that so these writings also may
fmd a place in our library with the other royal volumes.
Thou wilt therefore do well and wilt repay our zeal, if 39
thou lookest out six elders from each tribe, men of high
repute, well versed in the Law and able to translate, that
we may discover wherein the more part agree; for the
investigation concerns matters of more than ordinary
import. We think to gain great renown by the fulfil
ment of this task. We have sent on· this business 40
Andreas, of the chief of the bodyguards, and Aristeas,
who hold honoured places in our court, to confer with
1 So Josephus and Eusebius. The Aristeas M.SS insert a
negative.
2 Or '' as you call it."
32 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
thee. They bring with them dedicatory offerings for
the temple, and for sacrifices and other purposes an
hundred talents of silver. And shouldest thou also
write to us concerning my desires, thou wilt do a favour
and a friendly service ; and be assured that thy wishes
will receive instant fulfilment. Farewell."
41 To this letter Eleazar replied appropriately1 as follows:
" Eleazar the High Priest to King Ptolemaeus, his
sincere friend, greeting. Do thou fare well and the
queen Arsinoe, thy sister, and the children,2 so will it be
42 well and as we desire ; we too are in good health. On
receiving thy letter we greatly rejoiced because of thy
purpose and noble resolve, and we collected the whole
people and read it to them, in order that they might
know thy pious reverence for our God. We shewed
them also the vials which thou sentest, twenty of gold
and thirty of silver, the five bowls, and the table as
dedicatory offerings, and the hundred talents of silver
for the offering of sacrifices and for such repairs as
43 the temple may require. These gifts were brought by
Andreas, one of thy honoured courtiers, and Aristeas,
good men and true and of excellent learning, who in all
ways worthily reflect thy high principles and righteous
ness. They have also imparted to us thy message, and
have heard from our lips a reply in accordance with thy
44 letter. For in all things which are to thy profit, even
though thy request is contrary to our natural impulses,3
will we do thy bidding; this indeed is a mark of friend
ship and affection. For thou too hast in divers manners
1 Or "to the best of his ability." Perhaps "so far as he could
write Greek," the writer excusing the use of this language by a
Jew of Palestine (Wendland}.
" Arsinoe II, here referred to, is said to have been childless but
to have adopted the children of Arsinoe I.
3 Lit. "contrary to nature."
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 33
done great services to our countrymen which can never
pass out of mind. We therefore straightway offered 45
sacrifices on thy behalf and on behalf of thy sister and
thy children and thy friends, 1 and the whole people
prayed that thy undertakings might ever prosper, and
that Almighty God would preserve thy kingdom in peace
with honour, and that the translation 2 of the holy Law
might be to thy profit and carefully executed. And in 46
the presence of them all we selected six elders from each
tribe, good men and true, whom we are also sending with
a copy of the Law. Thou wilt then do well, righteous
King, to give orders that, so soon as the translation 2 of
the books be accomplished, the men be restored to us
again in safety. Farewell.
THE NAMES OF THE TRANSLATORS
"And their names 3 are, of the first tribe, Joseph, 47
Ezekias, 4 Zacharias, John, Ezekias, 4 Elisha : of the
second, Judas, Simon, Samuel,5 Adaius,6 Mattathias,
Eschlemias 7: of the third, Nehemias, Joseph, Theo
dosius, Basc>as, Ornias, Dakis : of the fourth, J onathas, g
4
Abraius, Elisha, Ananias, Zacharias,8 Chelkias 8: of the
fifth, Isaac, Jacob, Jesus, Sabbataius, Simon, Levi: of
the sixth, Judas, Joseph, Simon, Zacharias, Samuel, 5
Selemias: of the seventh, Sabbataius, Zedekias, Jacob, 49
Isaac, Iesias,9 Natthaius: of the eighth, Theodosius,
1 A court title. 2 Or " transcription."
3 The names, according to Josephus, form a postscript to the letter.
4 One of these names is probably corrupt.
• Text "Somoelus." 6 Either Adaiah (1"1'iV) or Iddo (ltl'1Y).
7 Representing ;,•~~~, which is more correctly represented by
le?..e1-.!1u in § 48.
• The names Zacharias, Chelkias are derived from the list in
the Syriac version of Epiphanius, De mms. et jJ1Jnd., who uses the
narrative of Aristeas (see Appendix, p. II I f.). In the MSS of
Aristeas Xa/3p(~s stands in place of Zacharias and the sixth name
in this tribe has disappeared.
9 Probably =Jesse (Epiphan. •~•It),
C
34 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
Jason, Jesus, Theodotus, John, J onathas : of the
ninth, Theophilus, Abraham, Arsamus, Jason, En-
50 demias, Daniel : of the tenth, Jeremy, Eleazar,
Zacharias, Baneas, Elisha, Dathaius 1 : of the eleventh,
Samuel, Joseph, Judas, J onathes, Caleb, 2 Dositheus :
of the twelfth, Isaelus, John, Theodosius, Arsamus,
Abietes, Ezekiel : in all seventy-two persons."
51 Such, then, was the reply which Eleazar 3 gave to the
king's letter.
(III) DESCRIPTION OF THE ROY AL PRESENTS
I will now fulfil the promise which I made to describe
the works of art. They were wrought with extraordinary
skill, as the king, in addition to his large grants, also
exercised a constant supervision over the craftsmen, so
that they could not neglect or scamp any part of the
52 work. I will first give thee an account of the table.
Now, the king's intention was to make this piece of work
of gigantic dimensions. However, he caused inquiries
to be made of persons in the locality as to the size of the
previous table 4 which stood in the temple at Jerusalem;
53 and when they reported the dimensions, he inquired
further whether he should make one on a larger scale.
Some of the priests and of the people said that there
was nothing to prevent him. But the king replied that,
though his wish was to make his gift five times as large,
yet he doubted whether such a table might not be
54 useless for the public ministrations. It was not his
desire that his offerings should merely be placed in the
temple; it would afford him far greater satisfaction, if
1 Or Thaddaeus, as one MS reads.
a So Epiphanius. The MSS have Xo,/3eii.
8 Or" El. and his colleagues." ~ i. e. the table of shewbread.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 35
the appropriate services were duly performed by the
proper mini~ters on the structures which he had designed.
He added that the small scale on which the former 5 5
works were constructed was not due to any lack of gold,
but was apparently so planned for some definite reason.
For 1 had any injunction been given 1 for a larger table,
there would have been no lack of means; it was not
therefore right to surpass or exceed the fit measurements.
At the same time he ordered that the utmost diversity 56
of artistic skill should be employed, for all his concep
tions were on a grand scale, and he had a natural gift
of imagt"nation enabling him to picture the appearance
which objects would present.2 He gave orders too that
details as to which there were no instructions in the
Jewt"sh Scripture should be beautified; wherever written
directions were given, the craftsmen were to be guided
by these in the measurements.
So they fashioned the table "two cubits in length" 3 57
and "a cubit and a half in height," making the work
"of pure gold" and perfectly solid ; I mean, the gold
was not overlaid upon other material, but the whole was
one massive plate of beaten metal.' And they made 58
"a border of an hand-breadth round about," with "rails
that revolved" 5 and bore a design of ropes in relief
1 Emended text.
1 Or "for designing the appearance of ohjects." The artistic
talent of Philadelphus is attested by the historians of his time.
3 Perhaps we should insert, with Josephus, "and a cubit in
breadth." The following description, obscure in many details, is
an elaboration of the description of the table of shewbread in Exod.
xxv. 23 (22) ff. (LXX}.
• Lit. "the plate .•. was itself affixed." The writer follows
the LXX, "gold, of pure golJ," as against the Heb., "thou shall
overlay it with pnre gold."
G Meaning doubtful: lit." twisted mouldings." In Exodus some
kind of cable moulding may be intended. In Aristeas the context,
with the paraphrase of Josephus, suggests a triangular ''rotatory"
bar crowning the "border" and turning on pivots at the corners.
36 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
59' marvellously wrought on the three sides. For the rails
were triangular in shape, and the work on each side was
fashioned upon the same p~ttern, so that, whichever way
they were turned, the appearance was the same; and as
the rail rested on the border 1 that side of it which
sloped towards the table was beautifully worked, although
the side which sloped outwards alone met the eye of the
6o spectator. And so the edge in which the two sloping
sides met was a sharp one and, whichever way the rail
was turned, held the uppermost place, since, as we have
said already, the shape was a triangular one. And precious
stones were inlaid in the rail between the rope-work;
set one kind beside another they were interwoven in an
61 inimitable manner. And they were all perforated and
securely fastened by golden pins. And at the angles
62 the clamps held them firmly in their places. Over
against the border and slanting upwards to meet the
eyes there was an egg-pattern encircling the table, wrought
of precious stones and elaborately worked 2 with a series
of flutings and relief work, packed closely together round
63 the whole table. And beneath the raised work of the
stones which formed the egg-pattern the craftsmen made
a crown of fruits of all kinds; projecting from it were
shewn vine clusters and corn-ears, dates also and apples
and olives and pomegranates and the like. They worked
the stones, which had the colour of each species of the
aforesaid fruits, to resemble those fruits and attached
64 them to the gold all round the sides of the table. And
next to the crown the egg-pattern was worked over again,
and the rest of the fluted and relief work, because the
table was made to be used on either side according to
choice,3 and with such symmetry that the rails and the
1 Text doubtful. • Text uncertain.
3 Text slightly emended.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 37
border reappeared on the side nearest the feet. For 65
they made a plate of solid metal, four fingers broad,
extending along 1 the whole breadth of the table, into
which the legs could be inserted, these being provided
with pins and clamps to secure them to the border, in
order that either side of the table might be used according
to choice.2 Thus the same appearance was presented
whichever side of the work was placed uppermost.3
On the top of the table they worked a " meander" 4 66
in relief, with costly precious stones of divers kinds 11
standing out in the middle of it, carbuncles and emeralds
and onyx and stones of other sorts which are noted for
their beauty. And next to the meander there was a 67
wonderful design of open net-work,6 giving a lozenge
shaped 7 pattern to the centre of the table ; and into this
were inlaid crystal and the so-called electron,8 affording
an inimitable spectacle to the beholders. And the legs 9 68
they made with lily-shaped capitals, the lilies bending
over beneath the table, while the parts which met the
eye were the upright leaves. The basis of the leg which 69
rested on the ground consisted entirely of carbuncle, a
hand-breadth high and of eight fingers' breadth, and in
appearance had the shape of a shoe ; upon this rested
the whole weight 10 of the leg. And they represented 70
ivy, intertwined with acanthus, growing out of the stone
and encircling the leg, together with a vine and its clusters
(these being worked in stone), right up to the top. The
pattern of the four legs was the same ; all the parts were
1 Or '' under." 2 Text slightly emended.
3 Meaning uncertain; text emended ('To al,'Ti, for 'TOV'To) after
Josephus.
• Or "maze." • Text emended.
• Lit. "a wonderful cloven web." 7 Or "rhombus-like."
• Probably "amber." 9 Lit. "feet," and so throughout.
1• Lit. "metal plate" (as in § 65).
38 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
carefully made and attached and with such consummate
skill and craftsmanship as exactly to resemble nature,
insomuch that if a breath of air blew upon them the
leaves stirred in their places; so closely was every detail
71 modelled upon the reality. The front 1 of the table they
made in three pieces, as it were a triptych, the pieces
being fitted together by dovetailing which was secured
by pegs in the thickness of the structure, while the join
ings were rendered invisible and undiscoverable. The
thickness of the whole table was no less than half a
cubit, so that the cost ef the whole work amounted to
72 many talents. For, as the king had determined not to
add to its size, he expended all the more upon these
details,2 even as much as would have been required for
a table on a larger scale ; and in accordance with his
purpose the whole was completed in a marvellous and
memorable style, with inimitable art and transcendent
beauty.
73 Of the mixing-bowls two were wrought in gold, and
from their bases to half-way up their sides bore a device
of scales in relief, with precious stones cunningly set
74 between the scales. Then above this was a meander,
a cubit in height, with its surface 8 wrought out of precious
stones of divers hues, and displaying not only beauty
but the most elaborate skill. Over this was a mosaic
of interlacing lozenge-shaped figures extending to the
75 brim and producing the appearance of net-work. In the
middle were bosses of precious stones of various kinds,
arranged alternately, and not less than four fingers broad,
which enhanced the beauty of the spectacle. Round
the crown of the brim were worked lilies with their
76 blossoms and intertwining vine-clusters. Such was the
1 Lit. "mouth." 2 Ttxt and meaning doubtful.
3 Text c;rnended,
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 39
fashion of the golden bowls, and they contained over
two firkins each. The silver bowls had a smooth surface,
and formed a veritable mirror, the marvel of them con
sisting in this very smoothness, which was such that
anything brought close to them was reflected more clearly
than in mirrors. But it is impossible to describe the 77
real impression produced by the completed 1 works of
art For when the vessels were finished and were set
side by side-that is to say, first a silver bowl, then a
golden, then another silver and another golden one
the nature of the sight was quite indescribable, and those
who came to view it could not tear themselves from it,
so dazzling was the brilliance and so en~rancing the
v1s1on. There was variety in the effect of the spectacle. 78
If one looked at the gold work, it was one of enchant
ment and astonishment, as the mind took in one by one
each detail of the execution. And again, when one
wished to turn one's eyes to the silver vessels set out
before him, all the surrounding objects were reflected,
wherever one stood, causing a still greater ecstasy to the
beholders. So the artistic skill displayed in the works
is quite beyond description.
On the golden vials they engraved vine-wreaths in the 79
centre, and about the rims they entwined in relief work
a wreath of ivy and myrtle and olive, in which they set
precious stones. And the rest of the relief work they
wrought in various patterns, holding it a point of honour
to make everything in a manner worthy of the king's
majesty. In a word, neither in the king's treasury nor 80
in any other was there the like of these works for
costliness and artistic skill. No little thought was spent
upon them by the king, who loved to gain a re11u
tation for the excellence of his designs. For ofttimes 81
1 Text (lit. "completed beforehand") doubtful.
40 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
he would neglect his public business 1 and would care
fully supervise the craftsmen, to see that they exewted
the works in a manner befitting the place to which they
were to be sent. And so they were all made in a
magnificent style and were worthy of the king who was
sending them and of the high priest who was the governor
8 of the place. So lavish was the supply of precious stones
2
(not less than five thousand were used, and they were
all of large size), and so first-rate was all the craftsman
ship, that the expenditure upon the precious stones and
the skilled work amounted to five times the value of the
gold.
(IV) DESCRIPTION OF JERUSALEM AND ITS
VICINITY
8J I have given thee this description of the presents
because I considered it to be necessary. The next
portion of my letter contains an account of our journey
to Eleazar; but first I will describe the situation of the
whole country. When we reached the district, we beheld
the city set in the centre of the whole of Judaea upon a
mountain which rose to a great height.
(a) THE TEMPLE: ENTRANCE, VEIL, ALTAR
8 Upon its crest stood the temple in splendour, with its
4
three enclosing walls, more than seventy cubits high, and
of a breadth and length matching the structure of the
edifice. The whole was built with a magnificence and
8S prodigality beyond all precedent. It was obvious that
no expense had been spared on the great doorway and
the fastenings which held it to the door-posts and the
86 stability of the lintel. And the curtain was made very
1 Or "levee," giving audience to ambassadors, etc.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 41
closely to resemble a door; 1 the fabric was kept in
perpetual motion by the draught of wind underneath
which caused it to bulge out from bottom to top, 1 and
the effect was a beautiful spectacle, from which it was
hard to tear oneself away.
The altar was built of a size in keeping with the place 87
and with the sacrifices which were consumed by fire,
and the ascent to it was on a like scale. The place was
approached by a gradual slope from a proper regard for
decency,2 and the ministering priests were clad in" coats
of fine linen "3 reaching 'to the ankles.
(b) THE TEMPLE WATER SUPPLY
The Temple4 looks towards the east, and its back is 88
turned westwards. The whole floor is paved with stones
and slopes down to the appropriate places, so as to admit
of its being flushed with water to wash away the blood
from the sacrifices ; for many thousand beasts are offered
on the feast days. The water-supply is inexhaustible. 89
An abundant natural spring bubbles up within the temple
area. There are, moreover, wonderful underground reser
voirs passing description, at a distance, as they pointed
out to me, of five furlongs all round the site of the temple,
each with innumerable pipes, so that the various channels
converge. It was explat'ned, too, how all these cisterns had 90
their bases and sides overlaid with lead, and over them is
laid a great mass of plaster, so that everything is made
secure; and how there are numerous outlets at the base
of the altar, which are invisible to all except the actual
ministrants, so that all the vast accumulation of sacrificial
1 Text and meaning not quite certain.
2 Cf. Exod. xx. 26.
3 Exod. xxxvi. 35 LXX (xxxix. 27 M. T.).
' Lit. "house."
42 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
91 blood is swept away in the twinkling of an eye. Such
is my belief as to the nature of the reservoirs, and I
will explain how it was confirmed. They led me more
than four furlongs out of the city, and at a certain place
bade me stoop down and listen to the rushing noise of
the meeting of the waters; thus was the magnitude of
the receptacles made evident to me, as I have described
them.
(c) THE PRIESTS AND THE PUBLIC SERVICES
The priests' ministration in its exhibition of physical
92
strength and in its orderly and silent performance could
in no way be surpassed. For they all of their own free
will undergo labours requiring much endurance, and
each has his appointed task. Their service is without
intermission, some providing the wood, others oil, others
fine wheat flour, others the spices; while others again
bring the pieces of flesh for the burnt-offering, displaying
93 extraordinary strength. For they grip with both hands
the legs of the calves, most of which weigh over two
talents, and then with both hands and with wonderful
dexterity fling the beast to a considerable height, and
never fail to plant it on the altar. The portions of the
sheep and goats are, likewise, remarkable for their weight
and fat. For those whose duty it is always select such
beasts as are without blemish and of exceeding fatness,
and then the service already described is performed.
94 There is a place set apart for them to rest, where those
who are relieved from duty take their seats. And there
upon, some of those who have had an interval of relaxa
tion rise up willingly, without any order for their
95 ministration being given. The deepest silence prevails,
so that one would suppose that there was not a single
person in the place, although the ministers in attendance
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 43
number some seven hundred, not to mention the large
multitude of those who bring their sacrifices to be
offered; everything is performed with reverence and in
a manner worthy of the divine majesty.1
(d) THE HIGH PRIEST'S VESTMENTS
And when we beheld Eleazar in the course of his 96
ministration, and his apparel, and the lustre lent by the
wearing of the "coat" 2 wherewith he is clad and the
precious stones about his person, we were struck with a
great amazement. For there are "bells of gold" around
the border of his "long robe," giving out a peculiar
musical sound, and on either side of these are "pome
granates" embroidered in gay colours of a marvellous
hue. He was girt with a rich and magnificent "girdle," 3 97
woven in the fairest colours. And on his breast he
wears what is called the "oracle," 4 wherein are set
"twelve stones" of divers kinds, fastened with gold,
bearing the names of the heads of the tribes according
to their original order, each of them flashing forth in
indescribable fashion its own natural hue. On his head 98
he has the "tiara," as it is called, and over this the
inimitable "turban," 5 the consecrated diadem, bearing
"engraven" upon "a plate of gold" in holy letters the
name of God, set between his eyebrows, full of glory.
Such is th.e raiment of him 6 who is judged worthy of these
things in the public services. And the general aspect of 99
these things produces awe and discomfiture, insomuch
that one thinks that one has passed into another sphere
outside the world; indeed, I confidently affirm that any
1 Lit. "great divinity." 0 Exod. xxviii 4, 31-35.
3 /lid. 39. 4 ibid. 15-21 ; xxxix. 8 ff.
' Or "mitre." Exod. xxviii. 36 ff.; Ecclus. xlv. 12.
• Some words appear to have fallen out in the Greek.
44 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
man who witnesses the spectacle which I have described
will experience an amazement and wonder indescribable,
and will be profoundly moved in his mind at the sanctity
attaching to every detail.
(e) THE CITADEL AND ITS GUARDS
100 To obtain an accurate knowledge of everything, we
ascended to the citadel of the city, which lies hard by,
and looked around us. It is situated on a very lofty
spot and is fortified with several towers, which are
constructed right up to the top of great blocks of stone,
as a defence, so we are informed, to the precincts of the
ror temple; so that, in case of any attack or revolution or
invasion of an enemy, no one might effect an entrance
within the ring-walls of the Temple.1 On the towers of
the citadel there are engines for discharging missiles and
machines of divers kinds, and the place commands the
ro2 enclosing walls aforementioned. The towers are guarded,
too, by the most trusted men, whose achievements have
fully proved their loyalty to their country. These men
had orders not to quit the citadel, except on the feast
days, and then only in turn, nor did they suffer any one
103 to enter it. Even when any injunction was given by
their leader2 to admit any persons as sightseers, great
care was exercised, as was shown in our case. For
although we were but two unarmed men, they could
hardly be brought to admit us to witness the offering of
Jo4 the sacrifices. And they said that they were pledged by
oaths to act thus. For they all had sworn, and had of
bounden duty and for conscience' sake fulfilled their
bond, that they, although numbering five hundred men,
1 Lit. "house."
• Apparently the high priest is meant (cf. § 122).
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 45
would not admit more than five persons at the same
time ; for the citadel was the one protection of the
temple, and its founder had thus securely fortified its
tower of defence.
(/) THE CITY AND ITS STREETS
The city is of moderate proportions, its circuit being 105
about forty furlongs, to give a rough estimate. In the
disposition of its towers and of the thoroughfares which
appear, some below, some above, with the cross-streets
through them, it has the familiar1 aspect of a theatre.
For the ground is irregular, as the city is built on a
mountain. There are also stair-ways leading to the 106
thoroughfares. For some persons take their way along
the higher level, and others underneath, 2 and they keep
as far as possible from each other on the road because
of those who are undergoing the usual purifications, to
prevent them from touching any forbidden thing.
(g) SMALL AND LARGE CITIES CONTRASTED
It was not without reason that the original founders 107
built the city of convenient proportions, but from a wise
insight. For as the country is extensive and fair, and
some parts, namely those in Samaria so called, and those
adjoining the country of the Idumaeans, are level plain,
while other parts are mountainous, 3 namely those ad
joining the country of Ju daea, the inhabitants must 3
devote their unremitting attention to agriculture and the
care of the soil, in order that these latter districts may
1 Emended text. See on §§ 105 f. G. A. Smith, Jerura!em,
ii. 440 f.
2 The meaning is doubtful.
• Restored by conjecture, some words having been lost in the
MSS.
46 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
also thereby obtain a plentiful supply of crops. In this
way cultivation of every sort is carried on and an
abundant harvest reaped throughout the whole of the
ro8 aforesaid land. On the other hand, it has been the fate
of all large and consequently prosperous cities to be
thickly populated themselves, while they neglect the
country, as the thoughts of every one are bent on enjoy
ment, and all men have a natural propensity to pleasure.
109 And this is what happened to Alexandria, a city which
surpasses all others in size and prosperity. The country
folk by migrating to the town and making a long stay
uo there brought agriculture to a low ebb. And so the
king, to prevent them from making a stay, ordered that
their visits should not exceed twenty days ; and he
likewise gave written injunctions to the officials, that if
it were necessary to summon any such persons to town,
rn they should decide their cases within five days. And as
he considered the matter one of great importance, he
appointed judges with their subordinates in every district,1
that so the farmers and their agents 2 might not, while
money-making in the city, reduce the granaries of the
city, I mean the proceeds of agriculture.
(h) THE COUNTRY AND ITS PRODUCE: HARBOURS,
RIVERS, MOUNTAIN-RANGES
rrz We have been led into this digression by Eleazar's
admirable exposition to us of the principles just men
tioned. Their industry in agriculture is indeed great.
For their country is thickly planted with olive trees and
is rich in cereal produce and pulse, in vines also and
honey in abundance; fruit trees of other kinds and palms
are beyond reckoning with them. There are cattle in
1 The Egyptian "nome." 2 Meaning doubtful.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 47
abundance of all sorts, and rich pasturage for them.
And so they rightly recognized that the rural districts n3
needed a dense population, and they constructed the
city and the villages in correct proportions. A great n4
mass of spices, precious stones, and gold is brought into
the district by the Arabs. For the country is well
adapted for commerce as well as for cultivation, and the
city is rich in the arts and lacks none of the merchandise
that is brought across the sea. It possesses havens well I r 5
situated which supply its needs, that at Ascalon, and
J oppa, and Gaza, as well as Ptolemais which was founded
by the King,1 and holds a central position compared
with these places, not being far distant from any of them.
The country enjoys everything in plenty, being well
watered on every side and securely enclosed. Round I I 6
it there flows the river called the Jordan which never
runs dry. The country originally comprised not less than
sixty million acres (although subsequently the neigh
bouring peoples encroached upon 2 it), and six hundred
thousand men 3 became possessors of lots of a hundred
acres each. The river, like the Nile, rises about the
time of harvest 4 and irrigates a large part of the land.
Over against the district of the people of Ptolemais 5 it 11 7
issues into another river and this flows out into the sea.
Other brooks, 6 as they are called, flow down t"nto the
plaz"n and encompass the parts about Gaza and the
1 i. e. Ptolemy Philadelphus.
8 The text is doubtful. According to another reading we might
translate "{when) the neighbouring peoples retired" (i. e. were
gradually driven back by the Israelites).
1 Cf. Exod. xii. 37, xxxix. 3, LXX; Nurub. xi. 21. "A
hundred-acre man" occurs frequently in the Petrie Papyri of the
veterans of Ptolemy JI, who received lots ofland in the Fayyum.
' Cf. Joshua iii. I 5.
5 Text, "the country of the Ptolemaeans" (? Egypt),
~ Or "mountain-torrents."
48 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
118 region of Azotus. The country is encircled by natural
defences, so that invasion is difficult and impracticable
for large numbers, because the passes are narrow, being
flanked by steep cliffs and deep ravines, and the whole
mountain-range which surrounds the entire country is of
a rugged cnaracter.
(i) THE MINES OF ARABIA
u9 We were further told that there were formerly copper
and iron mines in the neighbouring mountains of Arabia.
But these were stopped at the time of the Persian rule,
as the overseers of those days spread a false report that
their working was unprofitable and expensive, in order
120
to prevent the country from being spoiled for the sake
of the mining of the said metals and possibly taken out
of their hands as a consequence of the Persian over
lordship, while by the help of this false report they
found a pretext for entering the district.1
(V) ELEAZAR'S FAREWELL TO THE
TRANSLATORS
I have now given thee, dear brother Philocrates, such a
summary description of these matters as was necessary.
The story of the translation we will tell in the sequel.
I 21 Well, Eleazar selected the men of the best character and
the highest culture, such as one would expect from their
noble parentage. They were men who had not only ac
quired proficiency in Jewish literature, but had studied
122 most carefully that of the Greeks as well. They were there
fore well qualified to be sent on embassies, and undertook
this office whenever occasion required. They possessed
1 The meaning of this section is obscure.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 49
a great genius for conferences and discussions bearing on
the law. They cultivated the due mean, the best of
courses,1 and while they abjured a harsh and uncouth
disposition, they were likewise above conceit and the
assuming of an air of superiority over others, and in con
versation they were ready to listen and to give an appro
priate reply to every question. And this bearing they all
observed, and it was in such conduct that they most
desired to outstrip each other, being all worthy of their
leader and of his virtue. And one might see, in their 123
unwillingness to be torn from him, how they loved
Eleazar and he them. For not only did he write to the
king on the subject of their safe return, but he also
earnestly besought Andreas to work .for the same tnd,
and urged me 2 too to assist to the best of my 3 power.
And although we promised to give good heed to his 124
wishes, he said that he was deeply distressed, for he
knew how the king in his love of goodness considered it
the greatest of privileges, wherever he heard of any one
who surpassed his fellows in culture and wisdom, to
summon him to his court. Indeed, I have heard of a 125
fine saying of his, that by having about his person just
and prudent men he would possess the greatest protection
for his kingdom, since friends unreservedly offer advice
for one's best interests. And these qualities were
assuredly possessed by the men whom Eleazar was now
sending. And he kept asseverating on oath that he 126
would not let the men go, if it were merely some private
interest of his own which impelled him so to do, but it
was only for the common benefit to all his countrymen
that he was sending them. For, he added, a good life 127
1 With this praise of "the mean" cf. §§ 223 and 256. The
writer clearly favours the Peripatetic school.
2 Lit. "us." 1 Lit. . "our.',.
D
50 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
consisted in the observance of the laws, and this end
was attained much more by oral communication than by
reading. From these and similar observations it was
clear what were his feelings towards them.
(VI) ELEAZAR'S APOLOGY FOR THE
JEWISH LAW
g It is worth while briefly to mention the explanations
12
given by him in reply to our inquiries. For I suppose
that most men feel some curiosity about the regulations
in the law 1 concerning meats and drinks and the animals
129 which are considered unclean. Well, when we inquired
why, although there was but a single creation, some
things are considered unclean for food, and some even to
the touch (for the law is scrupulous in most things, but
in these matters it is excessively 2 scrupulous), he began
his reply as follows:-
130 "Thou seest," he said, "what an influence is exercised
by intercourse and association. By associating with evil
persons men become perverted and are rendered miser
able all their life long, whereas, if they consort with the
wise and prudent, they pass from ignorance and amend
131 their lives. Our lawgiver, then, in the first place en
joined 3 piety and righteousness, and expounded them
point by point, not merely by prohibitions but also by
positive commands, making plain the harmful effects of
disobedience and the visitations sent by God upon the
guilty. In the very first place of all he taught that God
132
is one, and that His power is made manifest through all
things, every place being filled with His sovereignty, and
1 Cf. Lev. xi. ; Deut. xiv. 3-20. Compare the treatment of the
same subject in the Epistle of Barnabas, § IO.
z Text doubtful; perhaps "doubly scrupulous."
3 Or '' laid down the principles of."
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 51
that none of the things done in secret by men on earth
is hidden from Him, but all that a man does and all
things that are yet to be are manifest in His sight. When 133
he had carefully elaborated these points and made them
plain, he shewed that even if a man should but think of
acting basely, let alone the doing of the wrong, he could
not be hid; thus throughout the whole of the law he
displayed the power of God.
"Beginning with these premises he went on to shew 134
that all other men except our nation consider that there
are many gods, although they are themselves far more
powerful than those whom they vainly reverence. For 135
they make effigies of stone and wood, 1 and assert that
they are images of those who discovered something use-
ful for their life, and these they worship, although their
senselessness is obvious.2 For that any one should thus 136
become a god in virtue of his invention is altogether
foolish ; for the inventors but took certain created
things and put them together and shewed that they
possessed a further use, but they did not create the
substances themselves; therefore it is idle and vain to 137
deify men like themselves. Moreover, there are still at
the present day many men more inventive and more
learned than the men of yore, and yet they would never
think of worshipping them. And the framers and authors
of these fables consider that they are the wisest of the
Greeks. What further need is there to speak of other 138
infatuated people, Egyptians and the like, who have put
their trust in wild beasts and most of the creeping
things and vermin, and worship these, and offer sacrifice
to these, whether alive or dead?
1 The treatment of idol-worship and its origin should be compared
with Wisdom xiii.-xv.
' Or "although it is obvious that they (the images) are without
feeling."
52 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
139 "When, therefore, the law-giver, who was endowed by
God to understand all things, had in his wisdom sur
veyed each detail, he fenced us about with impregnable
palisades and walls of iron, to the intent that we should
in no way have dealings with any of the other nations,
pure in body and mind, released from vain ideas, reverenc-
qo ing the one Almighty God above the entire creation. For
this reason the priests who lead 1 the Egyptians and have
closely investigated many things and been conversant
with the world,2 call us "men of God," a designation
which does not belong to the rest of mankind, but to
him only who reverences the true God. The rest are
141 men of meat and drink and raiment,3 for their whole
nature finds solace in these things. But with our
countrymen these things are counted of nothing worth,
but their reflections throughout their whole life concern
142 the sovereignty of God. So then, lest we should become
perverted by sharing the pollutions of others or consort
ing with base persons, he hedged us round on all sides
with laws of purification in matters of meat and drink
143 and handling and hearing and seeing. For, speaking
generally, all things to the natural reason are alike, being
all governed by the self-same power, and yet in every
detail there is a profound reason why we abstain from
the use of some things and share in the use of others.
For the sake of illustration I will run over one or two
points and give thee an explanation.
144 " Do not fall in with the rejected 4 view that it was
out of regard for mice and weasels 5 or such creatures
1 Or "the leading priests of the E. who have," etc.
2 Lit. "affairs." According to a conjectural reading "(our)
literature"; cf. Deut. xxxiii. 1, etc.
3 Lit. "shelter."
4 Lit. "fallen down" : perhaps "degraded" (Andrews).
5 Le,·. xi. 29. Cf. I Cor. ix. 9.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 53
that Moses drew up these laws with such exceeding
care. No, all these ordinances have been solemnly
made for righteousness' sake, to promote holy meditation
and the perfecting of character. For all the winged 145
creatures, of which we partake, are tame and distin
guished by cleanly habits, feeding on wheat and pulse,
such as pigeons, turtle-doves, locusts, 1 partridges, geese
too and all the like. But as touching the forbidden 146
winged creatures, thou wilt find that they are wild and
carnivorous and use the strength which they possess to
oppress the remainder of their kind and get their food
by cruelly preying on the aforesaid tame creatures ; and
not on these only, but they also carry off lambs and
kids, and do violence to dead men and living. By 147
these creatures, then, which he called unclean, 2 the law
giver gave a sign that those for whom the laws were
ordained must practise righteousness in their hearts and
oppress no one, trusting in their own strength, nor rob
one of anything, but must direct their lives by righteous
motives, even as the tame birds above mentioned con
sume the pulse that grows on the earth and do not
tyrannize to the destruction of their kin.
"By such symbols, then, the lawgiver has taught the 148
understanding to note that they must be just and do
nothing by violence, nor oppress others in reliance on
their own strength. For whereas it is not meet even to 149
touch the aforesaid creatures by reason of their several
natures, what strict precautions must we not take to prevent
the character from degenerating to a like condition? He 150
has, then, set forth all these rules as to what is permitted
us in the case of these and the other creatures by way
of allegory. For the parting _of the hoof and the dividing
1 Lev. xi. 22. Another reading names a species of moor-fowl,
2 Deut. xiv. 19. · ·
54 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
of the claws 1 symbolize discrimination in our every
151 action with a view to what is right; for the strength of
the whole body and its activity are dependent upon the
arms 2 and legs. He constrains us, then, to do every
thing with discrimination and with a view to righteous
ness; such is the signification of these symbols.3 He
152 further signifies that we are distinct from all men. For
most other men defile themselves by promiscuous unions,
working great unrighteousness, and whole countries and
cities pride themselves on these vices. For not only do
they have intercourse with males, but they even defile
mothers and daughters.4 But we have been kept apart
from these things.
153 "Again, the lawgiver has characterized the possessor
of the aforesaid quality of discrimination 5 as possessing
also the gift of memory. For 'all things which part the
hoof and chew the cud' 6 to thoughtful minds clearly
154 represent memory. For the chewing of the cud 7 is
nothing else but a calling to mind of life and existence;
155 for he considers 8 that life exists by taking food. And
therefore he gives exhortation by the scripture also where
he says thus, 'Thou shalt well remember the Lord who
wrought in thee the great and wonderful things.' 9 For,
when clearly perceived, they do appear 'great and glori
ous,' in the first place the construction of the body, and
the means for digesting the food, and the distinction
1 Lev. xi. 3 ff. ; Deut. xiv. 6 ff.
2 Lit. "shoulders." 3 Text doubtful.
4 The Egyptian custom of marriage with a sister is passed over
without remark.
0 Or "separation." 6 Lev, xi. 3.
1 Cf. Ep. of Barnabas rn, II ; Philo, De Spee, Leg. iv. 5 ; Theo
doret, Quaest. in Lev. xi. 189.
s Or (reading voµ.i(nm) "life is wont to exist."
9 A combination of Deut. vii. 18 and x. 21 LXX, the words "in
thee" in the latter verse being here referreq to the humaQ anatomy,
"in thy body." .
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 55
between the several members; but much more do the 156
ord,2rly arrangement of the senses, the operation and
invisible movement of the mind, and its rapidity in
suiting its action to each several occasion and its dis.
covery of the arts bear the marks of an infinite wisdom.1
And therefore he exhorts us to bear in mind, how that 157
the aforesaid things are 2 both created and 2 preserved
by the power of God. For he has appointed every time
and place for the continual remembrance of God, the
Ruler and Preserver. For instance, in the matter of 158
meats and drinks he bids us first to offer a part as a
sacrifice, and not till then to partake of food. In our
clothing, too, he has given us a symbol of remembrance.
Likewise also he has commanded us to set the oracles
'upon our gates and doors,' 3 that God may be had in
remembrance; and he expressly orders that the 'sign' 159
be 'bound round upon the hands,' 4 clearly indicating
that every action must be righteously performed with a
remembrance of our creation, and above all with a fear
of God. And he bids men 'when lying down and 160
when rising up' 5 to meditate on the things which God
has created, not in speech only, but reviewing also in
thought the change and the impression which passes
over them when they fall asleep, and the manner of their
waking, how divine, as it were, and incomprehensible is
the interchange of these states. 6
"Thou hast now been shewn the exceeding wisdom I 61
of the saying 7 concerning discrimination and memory,
according to our exposition of the parting of the hoof and
the chewing of the cud. For the laws have not been
made at random and capriciously, but with a view to
1 Lit. "contain an infinite manner."
• Meaning doubtful: lit. "are preserved ... with (?)creation."
3 Deut. vi. 9. ,i Ibid. 8. 5 Ibid. 7.
• Cf, §§ 213-216 and 3 Mace. v. II. 7 Text doubtful,
56 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
162 truth and to point the way to right reason. For by his
detailed injunctions concerning meats and drinks and
touch he bids us do and hear nothing heedlessly, nor
to resort to injustice by a misuse of the dominating power
163 of speech.1 In the case of the wild animals, too, the
same principle may be discovered. For the habits of
' weasel and mouse ' 2 and of all the like animals enm:ner-
164 ated are injurious. Mice mar and injure everything not
only for their own food, but in such a way that anything
which they have begun to injure becomes utterly useless
165 for man. And the weasel tribe is peculiar, for beside
the aforenamed habit it has a characteristic which defiles
it; it conceives through its ears and gives birth through
166 its mouth.3 And therefore the like habit of man is un
clean; that is to say, whenever they have embodied in
speech the things which they have received through the
ear and involved others in ills, they are guilty. of gross
uncleanness and are themselves utterly tainted with the
pollution of their impiety. And your king, as we are
informed, rightly puts such men to death."
167 And I said, "I suppose that thou speakest of the
informers; indeed he constantly exposes them to tortures
and painful deaths."
"Yes," he replied, "I speak of them. For to watch for
168 men's destruction is an unholy practice. And our Law
forbids us to injure any whether by word or deed.
"In my brief summary of these matters I have shewn
thee how every regulation has been made with a view to
righteousness, and nothing has been set down in the
Scripture heedlessly or in a mythical sense,4 but its pur
pose is that throughout our whole life we may in our
1 Or "the power of reason." 3 Lev. xi. 29.
a Cf. Ep. Barn. x. 8.
' +,it. ''fabulously." Another reading might mean'' capriciously, '1
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 57
actions exercise righteousness towards all men, remem
bering the sovereignty of God. So then all that is 169
said concerning meats and the unclean creeping things
and wild animals relates to righteousness and righteous
dealings between man and man."
To my mind, then, he appeared 1 to make an excellent 170
defence in every particular. He added, moreover, with
regard to the calves and rams and he-goats that are
offered, that men must take these from the herds ahd
flocks and sacrifice tame animals, and nothing that is
wild, that so the offerers of the sacrifices, bearing in
mind the symbolic meaning of the legislator, may have
no arrogant thoughts upon their conscience. For he
that presents the sacrifice makes an offering of his own
soul and all its affections. I think that his discourse on 171
these matters was worth repeating; and therefore have I
been led on, knowing thy love of learning, dear Philo
crates, to explain to thee the sanctity and natural 2
meaning of the Law.
(VII) RECEPTION OF THE TRANSLATORS
AT ALEXANDRIA
So Eleazar, when he had offered sacrifice and selected 172
the men and made ready many gifts for the king, sent us
on our way in great security. And when we reached 173
Alexandria, the king was informed of our arrival. On
our admission to the court, Andreas and I gave friendly
greetings to the king and delivered the letter from
Eleazar. The king was so anxious to meet the delegates 174
that he gave orders to dismiss all the other officials and
to summon the men. This proceeding excited universal 17 5
1 Text emended; the MSS have "he thought."
• Qr "inward" ; th~ e:,act sense is uncert11,i!l,
58 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
surprise, because the custom is that those who come on
official business gain access to the king's presence on the
fifth day, while envoys from kings or eminent cities with
difficulty secure admission to the court in thirty days.
But since he considered the new-comers worthy of higher
honour, and rightly estimated the eminent position of
him who sent them, he dismissed those whom he con
sidered superfluous, and remained walking to and fro,
176 waiting to greet them on their arrival. When they
entered with the gifts which had been sent and the
(precious) 1 parchments whereon was inscribed the law in
gold in the Jewish characters, the material being wonder
fully prepared, and the joining of the several leaves being
rendered imperceptible, the king, when he saw the men,
177 began to ask concerning the books. And when they
had taken the rolls out of their coverings and unrolled
the leaves, the king, after pausing for a long while and
making obeisance some seven times, said, "I thank you,
friends, and him that sent you still more, but most of all
178 do I thank God, Whose oracles these are." And when
all with one accord and with one voice, both the new
comers and the others who were present, exclaimed,
"\Vell spoken,2 0 king," he was moved to tears out of
the fulness of his joy. For the strain upon the high
strung soul and the overwhelming sense of honour where
179 our achievements are successful constrain to tears. He
bade them put the rolls back in their places, and then at
length did he greet the men and say, " It was right, 0
God-fearing men, first to pay homage to those treasures,
for the sake of which I sent for you, and thereafter to
extend the right hand to you ; for that reason have I
1 The word is absent from Josephus' paraphrase and should
perhaps be omitted.
a Or "Well be it," "God ,aye th(! king.''
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 59
done this first. I regard this day of your arrival as a 18o
gr_eat day, and from year to year shall it be held in
honour aU our long life. Moreover, it happens to be
the anniversary of our naval victory over Antigonus.1
Therefore also it shall be my pleasure to sup with you
to-day. All things," he added, "shall be duly prepared 181
for you in accordance with your national customs, and
for me with you." And when they had expressed their
gratitude, he ordered that the best quarters near the
citadel should be assigned to them, and the banquet
made ready.
(VIII) THE BANQUET IN HONOUR OF
THE TRANSLATORS
So Nicanor, the lord high steward,2 summoned Doro- 3
1 2
theus, who had the charge of gu~sts from this nation, and
ordered him to make preparation for everything. For
such was the arrangement decreed by the king, and it
may still be seen to this day. To every state which has
its special usages in matters of drink and meat and in its
mode of reclining was there a corresponding official in
charge ; and then, whenever any person visited the reign-
ing king, preparations were made in accordance with
their customs, in order that there might be no discomfort
to mar their enjoyment. This practice was followed in
the case of these envoys. Dorotheus, the patron of 183
visitors from their nation, was scrupulously attentive.
He laid out all the stores for the banquet which were in
his keeping and were set apart for receptions of such
guests. And he placed the couches in two rows, accord-
ing to the king's instructions; for he had ordered him to
1 See Introduction, p. ix.
1 Te"t emended: MSS "the chief physician,"
60 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
make half of the men recline at his right hand, and the
remainder behind his own couch, neglecting no means of
showing them honour.
184 When they had taken their places, he bade Doro
theus perform the customary rites of all his visitors
from J udaea. So he dispensed with the services of the
sacred heralds and ministers of the sacrifices and the
others who usually offered the prayers, and requested
one of those who had come with us, Elisha,1 the oldest of
the Jewish priests, to offer a prayer. And he arose and
185 spoke these memorable words: "May the Almighty
God give thee thy fill, 0 king, of all the good things
which He has created, and may He grant to thee and
thy wife and thy children and to them that are of one
mind with thee continual enjoyment of them while life
186 shall last l " At these words there was a burst of
applause with shouting and jubilation lasting for some
while; and thereafter they betook themselves to the
enjoyment of the banquet which had been prepared. All
the attendance at table was undertaken by the staff of
Dorotheus, among whom were royal pages and some
of those who held places of honour at the king's court.
(IX) THE WISE ANSWERS OF THE
TRANSLATORS
13
7
( 1) When, after an interval, an opportunity presented
itself, the king asked him who occupied the first place at
table (they were arranged according to seniority), how he
188 should preserve his kingdom unimpaired to the last. He
paused for a moment and replied, "Thou wilt maintain
it most securely thus-by imitating the never-ceasing
gentlenes.,s of God. For if thou shewest longsuffering
1 So Josephus. The i\risteas MSS call him ~leazar,
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 61
and punishest such as deserve punishment more gently
than 1 they deserve, thou wilt turn them from wickedness
and lead them to repentance."
(2) The king praised his reply, and asked the next one 189
how he should behave in all his actions.2 And he replied
that if he maintained just dealings with all men, he would
act in all things for his best interest, 3 considering that
every thought is clear to God. "By taking the fear of God
for thy starting-point, thou wilt never be disappointed."
(3) To him too he gave his cordial assent, and asked 190
another how he could keep his friends like-minded with
himself. And he said, "If they see thee taking great
forethought for the multitudes over whom thou rulest ;
and this thou wilt ·do by observing how God does good
to the human race, in that He provides them with health
and food and all else in due season." 4
(4) He expressed his approval, and asked the next, 191
how when he held his audiences and sat in judgement,
he might obtain a good report even from such as failed
in their suits. And he said, "If thou art impartial in
speech to all alike and never dealest arrogantly nor
tyrannically with offenders. And this thou wilt do if 192
thou beholdest the ordering of God's ways. The deserv-
ing have their petitions fulfilled, while to such as fail to
obtain them the harmful nature of their requests is made
known through dreams or events, and God does not
smite them according to their sins nor according to the
greatness of His might, but uses forbearance."
( 5) After highly commending him, he asked his neigh- 193
bour how he might be invincible in warfare. And he
1 Text emended: MSS "as they deserve."
2 Or, inserting one word, •' do everything/or the best" (Wendland}.
8 Text uncertain. Perhaps "if he kept himself just towards all,
he would act well upon every occasion."
1 Cf. § 259; also Ps. cxlv. r5, civ. 27; Acts xiv. 17, xvii. 25.
62 THE LE].'TER OF ARISTEAS
said, "If he did not put his trust in numbers or forces,
but always entreated God to give success to his enter
prises, while he himself discharged all his duties in a
spirit of justice."
194 (6) He approved his reply, and asked the next one how
he might inspire terror into his enemies. And he said, "If
while maintaining an abundant supply of arms and forces
he recognized that these were powerless to produce any
lasting and conclusive result; for God also, by granting
reprieves and making but a display of his sovereignty,1
instils terror into every breast."
195 (7) He praised him, and inquired of the next what would
be the highest good for his life. And he replied, "To
recognize that God is Lord of the Universe, and that
in our noblest achievements it is not we ourselves who
successfully accomplish our intentions, but God in his
sovereignty brings to fulfilment and guides the actions
of us all."
196 (8) He admitted the wisdom of his words, and asked
the next one how he could preserve all his possessions
unimpaired, and finally transmit them to his descendants
in the same condition. And he said, "By continual
prayer to God that thou mayest be inspired with good
thoughts in thy undertakings, and by warning thy de
scendants not to be dazzled by fame or wealth, since it is
God who bestows these gifts, and it is not on their own
account that they have pre-eminence over all."
197 (9) He expressed his agreement with this answer,
and inquired of him who followed how he should bear
with equanimity whatever befell. And he replied, " By
taking thought that all men are fashioned by God to
partake of the greatest evils, as well as the greatest
blessings, and it is not possible for any human being to
1 Text slightly emended. Cf. with the section Wisdom l(ii. 16-18.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 63
have no part in them. But God gives a good courage,
and we must beseech Him/or the same."
The king warmly commended him and said that all 198
their answers had been good. " I will put a question to
yet one more," he added, "and then I will cease for the
present, in order that we may turn our thoughts to
the enjoyment of the feast and make merry. And in
the following six days I will gain further enlightenment
from each in turn of those who remain."
(10) Thereupon he asked the man, "What is the true 199
aim of courage?" And he said, "To carry out right
counsels in the hour of danger in accordance with one's
purpose. But thy counsels, 0 king, are good and are
all fulfilled by God to thy profit."
And when they had all signified their assent with loud 200
applause, the king said to the philosophers, of whom not
a few were present, " I think that the virtue of these
men is extraordinary and their wisdom profound, seeing
that, with such questions propounded to them, they have
on the spur of the moment given suitable replies, and
have all made God the starting-point of their words."
And Menedemus, the philosopher of Eretria,1 said, 201
" True, 0 king; for, since the universe is ruled by
providence and these men are right in holding that
man is a creature of God, it follows that all power and
beauty of speech proceed from God."
The king assented thereto, and speeches ceased, and 202
they gave themselves up to festivity. And when evening
drew in, the party broke up.
On the following day the guests again took their 203
places and the banquet proceeded in the same order.
When the king thought that the time had come to put
1 See Introduction, p. ix.
64 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
inquiries to his guests, he proceeded to question those
who were placed next to the men who had given answers
on the previous day,
204 (11) He opened conversation with the eleventh (ten
having been questioned on the previous day), and when
silence was established, inquired how he could continue
205 to be rich. The man to whom the question was addressed
paused for a moment and replied, "If he did nothing
unworthy of his rulership, never acted licentiously, never
expended money on empty and vain things, but by acts
of beneficence drew his subjects to wish him well; for
God is the author of good things to all men, and man
must needs follow His guidance."
206 (12) The king commended him, and asked of another
how he should adhere to the truth. To this he replied,
"By recognizing that lying brings great disgrace upon all
men, but chiefly upon kings. For as they have power
to do what they will, what object have they for falsehood?
And thou must further take to heart, 0 king, that God
is a lover of the truth."
207 (13) He gave this reply his hearty approval, and
looking upon another said, "What is the teaching
of wisdom ? " And the next one replied, "As thou
desirest that evils should not befall thee, 1 but to partake
of all that is good, thou shouldst act in this spirit to
thy subjects and to offenders, and shouldst very gently
admonish such as are virtuous; for God draws all men
to Him by gentleness."
208 (14) He commended him, and asked of his neighbour
how he might be humane. And he said, "By observing
after how long a time 2 and through what great sufferings
1 Cf. the Jewish (negative) form of the golden rule, e. g. in the
Didache i. 2.
2 Or, with a slight emendation, '' with what trouble" (Wend
land).
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 65
the human race comes to maturity, aye and to the birth.
Thou must not therefore on slight provocation punish
or subject men to injuries, recognizing that human life
consists of pains and penalties. Thou wilt then, taking
all into consideration, be disposed to mercy ; for God
also is merciful."
(r5) With a word of approval to him he inquired of 209
the next in order, "What is the most essential quality
for a ruler jl" "To keep oneself incorruptible," he
replied; "to be sober for the greater part of one's life,
to honour righteousness above all things, and to make
friends of men of this character; for God also is a lover
of righteousness."
(r6) He applauded him, and said to the next, 210
"Wherein does piety consist ? " And he said, " In
the belief that _God is working in and has knowledge
of all things at all times, and that no unrighteous deed
or evil action of man can escape his eye ; for as God is
the benefactor of the whole world, so wouldst thou, by
imitating him, be void of offence."
(17) He signified his assent, and said to the next, 2rr
"What is the true aim 1 of kingship?" And he said,
"To govern oneself aright, and not to be carried away
by wealth and fame into extravagant and unseemly
desires ... if thou wouldst reason aright.2 For thou
hast all things at command which are needful 8; but
God has need of nothing and is gentle withal. Let thy
thoughts be such as become a man, and reach not after
many things, but such only as suffice for thy kingly
office."
(18) He commended him and asked the next one how 212
his deliberations might be for the best. And he replied,
1 Or "essence,'' "function." 2 Text apparently defective.
~ Text emended (Wendland}: MSS "as nothing."
E
66 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
"If in everything he continually set justice before him
and considered injustice to be equivalent to deprivation
oflife; for God also always promises the greatest blessings
to the just."
213 (19) He praised him, and inquired of the next in
order how he might be free from disturbing thoughts in
sleep. And he said, " Thy question is hard to answer.
For in sleep we cannot bring our true selves into play,
but are then at the mercy of sensations in which reason
214 has no part. For we have an impression on our minds
that we see the things which pass before us, but we are
unreasonable if we think that we are indeed on ship
board and ranging over the sea, or flying through the air
and passing to other climes, and doing other such things,
215 which we then suppose to be really taking place.1 How
beit, my conclusion, so far as I have reached one, is
this. Thou shouldest by every means, 0 king, take
piety as the governing motive of thy words and actions,
that so thou mayest have the consciousness, while follow
ing the path of virtue, of never doing a favour in defiance
of reason nor setting justice aside by an abuse of thy
216 power. For, as a rule, the mind is occupied in sleep
with the same things in which its waking hours are
spent ; but every thought and action which is set
towards the noblest ends is directed by God 2 both in
waking hours and in sleep. And therefore art thou
always encompassed with tranquillity."
217 (20) Him too he extolled, and said to the next one,
"As thou art the tenth to answer, when thy reply has been
given, we will betake ourselves to the banquet." Then he
asked, "How can we avoid doing anything unworthy of
1 Text emended. According to another emendation, "and yet
"e do suppose these things to be," etc.
1 Text emended.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 67
ourselves?" And he said, "Look ever to thy fame and 218
eminence, in order that thy words and thoughts may be
in keeping therewith, knowing that all thy subjects think
and talk about thee. For thou must not appear to be 219
worse than 1 the actors, for they look to the part which
they must assume and suit all their actions thereto ; but
thou art not acting a part, but art king indeed, God
having given thee the governorship which thy character
merits."
When the king had graciously applauded loud and 220
long, the guests were urged to take some rest. 2 And
when the turn of these men was ended, they betook
themselves to the next service in the order of the
banquet.
(21) On the following day the same order was 221
observed, and when the king thought that the time
was come to put inquiries to the men, he asked the
first of those who yet remained to be questioned, "What
is the highest form of government?" And he replied, 222
"To be master of oneself and not to be carried away by
one's impulses. For all men's minds have some innate
proclivity; probably most men are inclined to eating 223
and drinking and pleasure, while kings are bent on the
acquisition of territory and great renown.3 But modera
tion in all things is good. Take what God gives and
keep it, but desire not what is beyond thy reach."
(22) Pleased with his words, the king asked his 224
neighbour how he might be free from envy. And he,
after a pause, said, " Chiefly by considering how it is
God who apportions to all kings their glory and great
1 Lit. " least of the actors."
• Lit. "they urged the men to sleep." Apparently there has
been some dislocation in the text. 3 Text slightly emended.
68 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
wealth, and that no one by his own power 1 is king ; for
all men desire to partake of this glory, but they cannot,
since it is a gift of God."
225 (23) He commended the speaker at some length, and
asked the next one how he should despise his foes. And
he replied, "If thou hast studiously practised -goodwill
towards all men and formed friendships, thou needest ·
fear no man. But to be in high favour with all men
is the very best of good gifts to receive from God." 1
226 (24) He commended his words, and bade the_next one
reply to the question, how he might retain his renown.
And he said, " If with lovingkindness and gracious acts
thou art liberal and bountiful to others, thou wilt never
have lack of renown; but that the aforesaid graces may
continue thine, thou must constantly call upon God."
227 (25) He belauded him, and asked another, "With
whom 1 should we vie in generosity ? " And he replied,
"All men think that we should be liberal to those who
are well disposed to us, but I am of opinion that a keen
and open-handed generosity is due to those who dissent
from us, that by these means we may win them over to
what is right and to their 2 own interest. But one must
entreat God that this end may be attained, since He
rules the minds of all men."
28 (26) He assented thereto, and bade the sixth man
2
reply to the inquiry, "To whom should favour 3 be
shewn?" And he replied, "To parents at all times,
since God has given a very great 4 commandment con
cerning the honour due to parents.5 And in the second
place He sets the attitude of friend towards friend,
1 Text slightly emended. 2 Possibly "our."
• Or "gratitude."
4 Or" (the) greatest"; cf. Jos. c. Ap. II. 27, and, for Rabbinical
parallels, I. Abrahams, Studies zn Pharisaism, i. p. 26.
6 Exod. xx. 12.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 69
calling a friend 'the equal of a man's own soul.' 1 But
thou dost well in making all men thy friends."
( 2 7) He spoke kindly to him, and inquired of the 229
following one, "What is of like value with beauty?"
And he said, " Piety, for this is a beauty of the first
quality; and its power is love, which is God's gift.
And this dost thou possess, and hast in it all blessings
comprised."
(28) He applauded his answer very warmly, and 230
asked of the next how, after a failure, he should regain
the esteem which he enjoyed before. And he replied,
"Failure for thee is impossible, as thou hast sown the
seeds of gratitude in all men, and these produce a crop
of goodwill, which is mightier than the strongest armour
and affords the greatest protection. But should any 23r
fail, they should no longer do those things which
occasion their failure, but form friendships and act
righteously. But to be a doer of good deeds and not
of the contrary is a gift of God."
(29) Well pleased with this answer, he asked of the 232
next one how he might be free from grief. And he
replied, "By injuring no one, doing good to all, and
following after righteousness, since its fruits produce
freedom from grief. But supplication must be made to 233
God, that unforeseen accidents may not surprise and
injure us, I mean such as deaths, diseases, pains and
the like. But, as thou art pious, no such misfortune
will surely hefall thee."
(30) He commended him highly, and asked the tenth 234
man, " What is the highest form of glory ? " And he
said, "To honour God, and that not with gifts or
sacrifices, but with purity of soul and devout conviction
that all things are fashioned and directed by God in
1 Deut. xiii. 6 (LXX text).
70 THE LETTER OF ARTSTEAS
accordance with His will. And this is thy abiding belief,
as all men may see from thy actions in the past and in
the present."
235 Thereupon the king with a loud voice greeted them
all and spoke kindly to them, the other guests, especially
the philosophers, joining in the applause. For these
men in their conduct and speech far outran the philo
sophers, in that they took God for their starting-point.
And after this the king proceeded to shew his kindly
feelings by drinking the health of his guests.
236 (31) On the following day the order of the banquet
was as before, and when the king's opportunity came, he
began to question the men who sat next to those who
had already responded. Of the first he asked, "Can
wisdom be taught?" And he replied, "The soul is
so constituted that it can by divine power accept all that
is good and reject what is contrary thereto."
237 (32) He expressed his assent, and inquired of the next
one, "What contributes most to health?" And he said,
"Temperance. But this cannot be attained unless God
dispose the mind thereto."
238 (33) He gave him a kindly word, and asked of the
next how one should pay his debt of gratitude to his
parents. And he replied, "By giving them no pain;
but this is impossible unless God becomes the mind's
guide towards all that is best."
239 (34) To him also he gave his assent, and inquired of
the next in order how he should become an eager
listener. And he replied, " By remembering that all
knowledge is profitable, since it enables thee on an
emergency to select and apply some one of the things
which thou hast heard and to confront the crisis,1 with
1 Text and meaning are doubtful,
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 7 r
the aid of God's guiding hand; for the fulfilment of
men's actions rests with Him."
(35) He commended him, and inquired of the next 240
how he should avoid any action contrary to law. He
replied thereto, " If thou wilt recognize that it is God
who put the thoughts into the hearts of the lawgivers
to the end that men's lives might be preserved, thou wilt
become a follower of them."
(36) He approved his reply, and said to another, 241
"What advantage does kinship bring?" And he replied,
"The strength of kinship is apparent if we consider that
we are the losers by the misfortunes which befall our kin
and we make their sufferings our own. By such conduct 242
we shall win their esteem and a l)_igher place in their
regard; for an active and kindly sympathy forms of
itself an indissoluble bond in all circumstances. But in
the day of their prosperity we should crave nothing of
theirs but entreat God to give them every blessing."
(37) He accorded a like approval to him as to the 243
others, and asked another man, "How is fearlessness
attained? " And he said, " When the mind is conscious
of no wrong-doing, and God directs it so that all its
counsels are good."
(38) With a word of assent to him, he inquired of 244
another how he might have a right judgement always at
command. He replied, " If he constantly kept the
misfortµnes of men before his eyes and marked how
God takes away prosperity and advances others to glory
and honour."
(39) He gave him his hearty approval, and requested 245
his neighbour for a reply to the question, how he might
avoid a life of ease and pleasure. He replied, "By
bearing always in mind that he was ruler of a great
kingdom and governor of vast muititudes, and that his
72 THE LETTER OF ARISTEA$
mind must. not be occupied with anything else, but
devote its attention to their welfare. But he must ask
God that none of his duties might be neglected."
246 (40) Him too he commended, and asked the tenth
man how he might detect persons who were dealing
treacherously with him. To this he replied, "By observ
ing whether the bearing of those about his person was
frank, and whether an orderly conduct was preserved1
at receptions and councils and in general intercourse,
and by seeing that the bounds .of propriety were in
no way exceeded in congratulations and in their whole
247 behaviour. But God will guide thy mind, 0 king, to
what is best."
The king applauded and praised them all, addressing
each one by name, the other guests doing likewise, and
they began to make merry.2
248 (41) On the following day he waited for the ·right
moment and asked the next in order, "What is the
grossest negligence?" To this he replied, " When a
man is careless of his children, and does not devote
every effort to their education. For our prayers to God
are always not so much for ourselves as for our offspring,
that every blessing may be theirs. But the desire that3
our children may be endued with sobriety comes through
the power of God."
249 (42) He said that he had spoken well, and asked
another how he might be a lover of his country. "By
keeping iri mind," he replied, "that it is good to live
and die in one's own land. Residence in a foreign
1 Or perhaps "the rule of precedence was observed."
1 Lit. "to sing"; cf. Ecclus. xl. 20, xlix. I.
s Perhaps, with the omission of one letter, "to livt to see our
children endued," etc.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 73
country1 brings contempt upon the poor man and dis
grace on the rich, as though they were in exile for a
crime. If, then, thou bestowest benefits upon all men
(as is thy constant habit, since God grants thee favour
with all) thou wilt be accounted a lover of thy country."
(43) After hearing him he inquired of the next one 250
how he might live amicably with his wife. "By bearing
in mind," he replied, "that womankind are headstrong
and energetic in pursuing their desires, and subject to
sudden changes of opinion through fallacious reasoning,
and weak by nature ; and one must treat them sanely
and not by opposing provoke a quarrel. For life is then 251
guided aright, when the steersman knows the port to
which he must direct his course. But, if God's help be
invoked, life is indeed at all times steered aright."
(44) He ~.dmitted the wisdom of his words, and asked 252
the next one how he might be kept free from error.
And he said, "By always acting with gravity 2 and
deliberation, and not giving credence to slanders, but
testing for thyse!f what is told thee, and pronouncing thy
own judgement on the petitions submitted, and being
guided by thy own judgement in granting them, so wilt
thou be free from error, 0 king. But to be of this mind
and to live this life is a work which demands divine
power."
(45) He was delighted with these words, and asked 253
the next one how he might be free from wrath. To this
he replied, "By bearing in mind that he had power to
do all things, even to inflict sentence of death if he gave
way to wrath ; and this were unprofitable and grievous
that he should deprive many of life because he was lord.
1 Cf. the description of the humiliating life of'' the sojourner" in
Ecch·s. xxix. 22-28.
' Text emended.
74 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
254 And where all were his subjects and none resisted him,
to what end should he be wroth ? And thou must
know," he added, "that God governs the whole world
with kindliness and without anger at all, and thou must
follow His example, 0 king."
255 (46) He said that he had answered well, and inquired
of him who came next, "1Vherein does wise counsel
consist?" "In doing all things well and with delibera
tion," he replied; "not neglecting in our counsels to
weigh 1 the injurious effects of following the opposite
view, that so after considering every point we may be
well advised and our purpose may be fulfilled. But,
what is more important than all, by the sovereign power
of God every resolution of thine will find fulfilment,
since thou dost practise piety."
256 (47) He said that he, too, had answered rightly, and
asked another, "What is philosophy ? " "It is to
deliberate well over all contingencies," he replied, "and
not to be carried away by one's impulses, but to ponder
the injuries which are the outcome of the passions, and
to do the duty of the moment as it should be done,
practising moderation. But we must pray to God for
Ehe gift of a regard for these things."
257 (48) Him, too, he applauded, and asked another how
he might meet with acceptance when travelling abroad.
"By treating all men as thy equals," he said, "and
behaving rather as inferior than as superior to those
among whom thou sojournest. For God alike 2 accepts
the lowly disposition, and the human race also deals
kindly with the humble."
1 Literally "comparing," i. e. with the advantages of the course
adopted.
2 Or "For it is commonly found that (it is a recognized principlt
that) God," etc.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 7 5
(49) He expressed his assent thereto, and asked 258
another how he could so build that his structures might
endure hereafter. To this he replied, "If his creations
were on a great and majestic scale, so that beholders
would spare them for their beauty, and if he neglected 1
no one who wrought such works, and did not compel
others to minister to his needs without pay. . For if he 259
considered how God shews great consideration for the
human race, supplying them with health and keenness of
perception and his other gifts, 2 he himself would act
likewise, by rendering to men the due reward for their
arduous labours. For it is the works which are done in
righteousness which also endure."
(50) He said that he, too, had spoken well, and asked 260
the tenth, " What is the fruit of wisdom? " And he
replied, " To be conscious of no wrong-doing and to
live a life of since.ity. · For from these things thou 261
gainest the highest joy and a tranquillity of soul, most
mighty king, aye and good hopes in God, while thou
dost govern thy kingdom in piety."
And all the company after hearing them expressed
their approval with loud applause. Thereupon the king
in the fulness of his joy turned to the drinking of
healths.
(51) On the following day the banquet proceeded in 262
the same order as before, and when the time was come
the king questioned those who yet remained. And to
the first he said, " How should one keep oneself from
pride? " And he answered, " By preserving a sense of 26 3
equality and reminding himself on all occasions that he
was a man as well as a leader of men. And God
1 Or "s d ismissed,"
2 Cf. 190.
76 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
putteth down the proud but exalteth the meek and
humble." 1
264 (52) After a kindly word to him he asked the next in
order, "Whom should one take for one's counsellors? "
"Those," he replied, "who had been tried in many
affairs and preserved a sincere loyalty towards him, and
all who shared his principles. But, that these ends may
be attained, God manifests Himself to those who are
worthy."
265 (53) He commended him, and asked another, "What
is the most necessary possession · for a king?" " The
good wishes and love of his subjects," he replied. "For
by these there is formed an indissoluble bond of loyalty.
But it is God who causes these things to fall out as thou
wouldest have them."
266 (54) He commended him highly, and inquired of
another, "What is the aim of oratory ? " And he said,
"To convince one's opponent, pointing out his errors
in an attitude of deference.2 For in this way wilt thou
win over the hearer, not by direct contradiction, but by
showing appreciation withal with a view to convincing
him. But persuasion is attained through God's working."
267 (55) He said that he had spoken well, and asked
another how he should live amicably with the many
different races within his kingdom. "By acting the
proper part towards each," was his reply, "taking
righteousness for thy guide, even as thou dost, since
God grants thee right judgement."
68 (56) He gave him his cordial thanks, and said to the
2
next one, "For what things should one be grieved?"
1 Cf. I Sam. ii. 7 f., Prov. iii. 34, Luke i. 51 f.
2 Such (lit. "by a subordinate position") I am now convinced
is the meaning. Andrews (after Wendland) translates "in ~ well
ordered array of argument,,"
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 77
To this he replied, "For our friends' misfortunes, when
we see that they are protracted and irremediable.
Reason does not permit us to be grieved for such as
are dead and released from ills ; yet all men do so
grieve, thinking only of themselves and their own
advantage. But to escape from every ill is possible only
through the power of God."
(57) He said that he had answered aright, and asked 269
another, " How does ill-repute arise? " And he replied,
"When pride and unbounded self-confidence lead the
way, dishonour and ruined reputation follow hard on
their heels. But all reputation is at God's disposal, who
assigns it where He will."
(58) His reply also he endorsed, and asked the next 270
man to whom he should entrust himself. "To those,"
he replied, "who attend upon thee out of goodwill, and
not from fear or self-interest,1 making gain their sole
motive. For the one is a token of love, but the other
of ill will and time-serving; for the man who is bent on
advancing his own interests is a born traitor. But thou
hast the goodwill of all men, since God gives thee good
counsel."
(59) He said that he had answered wisely, and said 271
to another, "What preserves a kingdom?" To this he
replied, "Care and watchfulness to see that no injury
is inflicted by those who are set in positions of authority
over the people. And such is thy practice, since God
grants -thee the gift of grave reflection."
(60) He spoke encouragingly to him, and asked another, 272
"What is it that maintains favour and honour?" And
he said, "Virtue, for it is the fulfilment of good works,
and rejects what is base; even as thou dost preserve thy
1 Literally "consideration," either for their own interests, or, it
may be, "to gain thy consideration."
78 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
perfect bearing towards all by the gift which thou hast
from God."
273 (6r) He received his reply graciously, and asked the
eleventh (for their number exceeded seventy by two),
how even in warfare he might maintain a peaceful tran
quillity of soul. And he replied, " By the consciousness
of not having wronged any of thy subjects, and that all
will fight in return for benefits received, knowing that
even though they lay down their lives thou dost care for
274 their welfare.1 For thou never failest to make reparation
to any, such is the kindheartedness which God has given
thee."
He loudly applauded and expressed his hearty approval
to them all, and then drank a long draught to the health
of each and gave himself up to enjoyment, sharing the
men's society with merriment and high elation.
275 (62) On the seventh of the days the banquet was pre-
pared on a larger scale, as many other visitors from the
cities2 were admitted, for a great number of ambassadors
were in attendance. And when the time came the king
asked the first of those who had not yet answered,
how he might avoid being deceived by false reasoning.
276 And he said, "By scrutinizing the speaker and his
words and the subject of his speech, and by taking time
and asking the same questions in different forms. But
the possession of an alert understanding and the power
of passing judgement in every case is a beautiful boon
of God; and this dost thou possess, 0 king."
277 (63) The king loudly applauded, and asked another,
"Why do most men not embrace virtue?" "Because,"
he replied, "all men are by nature intemperate and
han:\<:er after their pleasures, by reason of which things
1 Lit. "lives," i.e. their dependents. 2 Cf. § r75.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 79
comes injustice and a sea of covetousness. But the 278
virtuous state checks those who are drifting into a life
of self-indulgence and bids them prefer temperance and
righteousness. But all this is under the direction of
God."
(64) The king said that he had answered well, and 279
asked the next one, " Whose guidance should kings
follow? " And he said, " The guidance of the laws, that
so by righteous dealings they may repair the lives of men,
even as thou by such action hast laid the foundation of
an everlasting memorial for thyself, through following
the divine commandment."
(65) He said that he also had spoken well, and asked 280
the next, "Whom should we appoint chief magistrates?" 1
And he said, "Those who have a hatred of wrong and
do what is just, imitating their ruler's conduct, to the
intent that they may ever be in good repute; even as
thou dost," he added, "most mighty king, God having
given thee a crown of righteousness." 2
(66) He loudly signified his approval and, turning to 281
the next one, said, "Whom should we appoint as officers
over the forces ? " And he replied, "Those who are
distinguished for bravery and justice and are more
anxious for the safety of their men than to gain a victory
while risking their lives in rash enterprises. For as God
does good to all, so dost thou, making Him thy example,
do good to thy subjects."
(67) He said that his answer was good, and asked 282
another, "What man is worthy of admiration?" And
he said, "He that is endowed with glory and riches and
power and yet inwardly regards himself as on an equality
1 The reply and the succeeding question show that <1Tpa.T'1')'&s is
here used of a civilian official (the governor of a district of Egypt)
1 Cf. 2 Tim. iv. 8.
80 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
with all men, even as thou by such action art worthily
admired, since God grants thee a care for these things."
283 ( 68) To him also he gave his assent, and said to the
next, "Upon what matters should kings spend most of
their time? " And he said, " In reading and the study of
the records of official journeys, 1 which are drawn up for
kings 2 with a view to the amelioration and preservation
of the subjects. And by so doing thou hast won a
renown beyond the reach of others, since God fulfils thy
desires."
284 (69) The king spoke to him enthusiastically,3 and asked
another what he should take for his pastimes in his hours
of relaxation and recreation. And he said, "To watch
plays which are played with propriety and to set before
one's eyes scenes from life enacted with decency and
285 restraint is profitable to one's life and appropriate. For
even in these matters some instruction is contained, since
often by the most insignificant of things some desirable
lesson is conveyed. But thou hast practised all restraint
and carriest thy philosophy into thy actions, while thou
art honoured by God for thy perfect virtue."
286 ( 70) He was well pleased with these words, and said to
the ninth, "What should be one's conduct at banquets?"
And he said, "Thou shouldest invite such as are lovers
of learning and able to suggest what may be useful to
the kingdom and to the lives of thy subjects.~ No more
287 harmonious or sweeter music 5 couldest thou find. For
these are beloved of God, since they have trained their
minds in the highest learning. And such indeed is
1 The papyri afford examples of the diaries or acta diurna which
officials in Egypt had to keep. Cf. § 298 inf
2 MSS "kingdoms."
a Text (lit. "actively," (?) = ''emphatically") doubtful.
' Cf. on the same topic Ecclus. ix. 16, xxxi. (xxxiv,) 12ff,
5 Or perhaps "nothing more harmonious or educative,"
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 81
thy practice, since all thy actions are directed by
God."
( 7 1) Delighted at his words, he inquired of the next 288
one, "Which is the best for the people, that a commoner
should be set over them 1 as king, or one born of royal
blood?" And he said, "He who has the noblest nature.
For some kings of royal lineage are inhuman and harsh 289
towards their subjects; and much more is this true of
some who have risen from the ranks, who after experi
encing misery and a taste of poverty have, on becoming
rulers of multitudes, proved themselves more cruel than
the unholy tyrants. But, as I said before, a good dis- 290
position which has had the advantage of culture is fitted
to bear rule, even as thou art a great king, not so much
through the pre-eminent glory of thy rule and thy wealth,
as because thou hast outstripped all men in gentleness
and kindness, since God has conferred these gifts upon
thee."
(72) He commended him at some length,2 and asked 291
him who was last of all, "What is the greatest achieve
ment in the office of a king?" To this he replied, "If
his subjects enjoy continual peace and get speedy justice
done them when their cases are tried. And these results 292
follow when the governor is a hater of evil and a lover
of good and makes much of the saving of a man's life;
even as thou regardest injustice as the greatest of evils,
and by thy just government in all things hast procured
for thyself an imperishable renown, since God vouchsafes
to give thee a pure mind untainted with evil."
When his speech was ended, there was a burst of 293
applause with shouting and jubilation lasting for a good
1 Text emended: MSS "appointed by them.''
2 l'ossibly the words "during a long time" should be attached
to the preceding speech.
F
82 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
while. And when this ceased, the king took a goblet
and drank a toast in honour of all his guests and the
speeches which they had delivered. And in conclusion
he said, "You have brought me the greatest of blessings
294 by your coming, for I have derived great benefit from
the doctrine which you have laid down to guide me in my
kingly office." And he commanded that to each should
be given three talents of silver and the slave who should
hand it to him. All the guests shouted their approval
and the banquet become a scene of rejoicing, while the
king gave himself up to a continuous round of festivity.
295 Now, if I have been too r,rolix,1 dear Philocrates, I
pray thee to excuse this fault. For I admired beyond
measure the way in which the men on the spur of the
moment were ready with their replies which required much
296 meditation; and, seeing that their interrogator had care
fully thought out each question, while the respondents
one after the other had the task of replying thereto, they
did indeed appear to me and to those who were present,
but chiefly to the philosophers, deserving of admiration.
And I believe that to all into whose hands this narrative
297 may come it will appear incredible. But to be untruth
ful in matters which are reported in the public archives
is not meet. Were I even to pass over anything, it
would be an act of impiety where such matters are
concerned. No, we describe just what took place,
conscientiously disclaiming all error. To this end, so
much was I impressed with their powers of speech, I
endeavoured to obtain information from those persons
who record in detail all that takes place at the king's
298 audiences and entertainments. For it is the custom, as
thou art aware, to have a record kept of all that is said
1 Text emended.
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 83
and done from the hour when the king begins to• give
audience until he retires to rest, and the practice is a
good and useful one. The next day, before any audience 299
is given, the minutes of the doings and sayings of the
previous day are read through, and any irregularity which
has occurred is corrected. \Ve have, then, as we said, 300
obtained accurate information on all points from the
public records,1 and have set it down here in writing,
knowing as we did thy love of useful learning.
(X) THE TRANSLATION AND ITS RECEPTION
Now after three days Demetrius took the men with 301
him and passing over the break-water,2 seven furlongs 3
in length, to the island crossed the bridge and proceeded
to the northern district. There he held a session in a
nouse which had been prepared by the sea-shore, magni
ficently built in a secluded situation, and bade them
carry out their work of translation, since all the necessary
appliances had been well provided. And so they pro-302
ceeded to carry it out, arriving at an agreement on each
point by comparing each other's work; the appropriate
rendering so agreed on was then transcribed under the
direction of Demetrius. The session used to last until 303
the ninth hour, and thereafter they would depart to
attend to their bodily comforts, all their wants being
plentifully supplied. Moreover, Dorotheus 4 used every 304
day to make the same arrangements for them as were
made for the king, for he had the king's order so to do.
Every day at dawn they would come to the court, make
1 Or '' from the keepers of the public records." The text is
slightly emended.
• For the island of Pharos and the Heptastadion which connected
it with the mainland see Strabo xvii. 6 (792).
s Gr. "stades." • Cf. § 182.
84 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
their salutation to the king and depart to their own place.
305 And when, as is the custom of all the Jews, they had
washed their hands in the sea and had offered a prayer
to God, they betook themselves to the reading and
306 interpretation of each passage.-! questioned them on
this point, why it was that they washed their hands before
praying. And they explained that it was in token that
they had done no wrong, since the hands are the medium
for all activity ; in such a beautiful and pious spirit do
they make all things symbols of righteousness and truth.-
307 Thus, as we have said already, they assembled every day
in this spot, which the peacefulness and brilliant light
rendered so delightful, and carried on their appointed
task. And so it came about that the translation 1 was
accomplished in seventy-two days, as though this
coincidence had been intended .
.: io8 And when the work was ended, Demetrius ass em bled
the Jewish people on the spot where the translation had
been made and read it through to the whole assembly
in the presence of the translators, who received another
great ovation from the people in recognition of the great
309 services which they had rendered. And they gave a
similar reception to Demetrius and requested him to
have a copy of the whole Law transcribed and to present
310 it to their rulers. And after the reading of the rolls
the priests and the elders of the translators and some
members of the Jewish community and the rulers of the
people stood up and said, "Forasmuch as the translation
has been well and piously executed and with perfect
accuracy, it is right that it should remain in its present
31 r form and that no revision should take place." And when
all had assented to these words, they 2 bade them, in
1 Lit. "transcription."
1 Or, according to another reading, "he (Demetrius) bade them."
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 85
accordance with their custom, pronounce an imprecation
upon any who should revise the text by adding to, or in
any way transposing,1 or omitting ought from, what had
been written; 2 and herein they did well, to the intent
that the work might for ever be preserved imperishable
and unchanged.
When word of these proceedings was brought to the 312
king, he greatly rejoiced, for it seemed that his purpose
had been securely attained. The whole work was read
through to him, and he was greatly astonished at the
spirit of the lawgiver. And he said to Demetrius, "How
is it that none of the historians or poets ever thought of
mentioning such great achievements?" And he said, 313
"Because the Law is holy and has been givtn by God;
and some of those who did essay to do so were smitten
of God and desisted from their attempt." For he said 3q
that he had beard Theopompus 3 tell hc,w when he was
too rashly intending to introduce into his history some
of the incidents from the Law which had previously been
translated, 4 his mind was deranged for more than thirty
days; and when the disorder abated he besought God
that the cause of the misfortune might be made plain to
him; and when it was shewn him in a dream that his 315
desire to disclose divine truths to common men was
misguided, he desisted, and thereupon recovered his
1 Or "altering."
2 Cf. Dent. iv. 2, xii. 32, and for the imprecation Rev. xxii. r8 f.
3 Theopompus, the historian, lived from about 378 to 300 B.c.
About 305 B.c. he came to Egypt, but was not in favour with
Ptolemy I, who would have put him to death as a dangerous busy
body had not his friends interceded for bis life. It is interesting to
compare this with the statement in Ari,teas as to his meddling with
divine matters, although the incident here related has probably no
foundation in fact.
• Or perhaps "when he was intending to introduce .. some
of the incidents from the Law which had previously been translated
in a somewhat misleading way" (cf. § 2o). ·
86 THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS
316 reason. "I have been informed too," he added, "by
Theodectes, 1 the tragic poet, that when he was intending
to introduce into one of his plays something recorded
in the Book,2 he was afflicted with cataract of the eyes ;
and, suspecting that this was the reason for his mishap,
he besought God's mercy and after many days recovered
his sight."
lXI) THE DEPARTURE OF THE
TRANSLATORS
317 The king, when he heard the explanation which
Demetrius gave of this matter, as above narrated, made
obeisance, and ordered that great care should be taken
of the books, and that they should be guarded with
318 proper awe. He further besought the translators that
after their return to Judaea they would visit him very
often. It was but right, he added, that they should now
be sent home, but, should they visit him, he would in
hounden duty treat them as friends, and they would
319 meet with the utmost consideration 3 at his hands. He
ordered preparations to be made for their sending off
and treated the men munificently. To each one he
gave three of the finest changes of raimerit, and two
talents of gold, and a side-board 4 of a talent in weight,
and all the furniture for the three couches of a dining-
320 room. To Eleazar also he sent by the hands of their
escort ten couches with legs of silver and all the appurte
nances thereof and a side-board 4 of thirty talents and
1 Theodectes, a rhetorician and tragic poet, a contemporary and
on one occasion a rival of Theopompus, circa 375-334 n.c.
a This seems to be the earliest use of ·,, f,/f!>.os for a collection of
sacred writings.
3 Text slightly emended: !\ISS "recei,·e rich presents," perhaps
rightly (cf. App. p. 103).
• Or" cupboard" in its literal sense (r Mace. xv. J2). The MSS,
omitting one letter, 1<,ad "a small cup,"
THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS &7
ten changes of raiment and a purple robe and a magnifi
cent crown and a hundred pieces of fine woven linen
and vials and dishes and two golden bowls as a dedicatory
offering. He wrote a letter also requesting him that if 321
any of the men should choose to return to him he would
not prevent them from so doing ; for he counted it a
privilege to enjoy the society of learned men, and would
rather lavish his wealth upon such persons than upon
vanities.
(XII) CONCLUDING ADDRESS TO
PHILOCRATES
There, Philocrales, thou hast the whole story which 322
I promised thee. And indeed I believe that thou findest
greater pleasure in these matters than in the books of
the romancers; 1 for thou art devoted to the study of
those things which can profit the mind and art at most
times occupied therewith. I shall, moreover, attempt to
put on record whatever else is worthy of narration, that
by the perusal thereof thou mayest win the fairest reward
for thy zealous desire.
1 Or "mythologists.''
APPENDIX
THE EVIDENCE OF SOME ANCIENT JEWISH AND
CHRISTIAN WRITERS ON THE ORIGIN OF THE
SEPTUAGINT VERSION.
(A) Jewish (Rabbinic).
(I) MEGILLATH T AANITH (The "Roll of Fasting").
[The calendar of Fast-days and Festivals seems to
have originated in Maccabaean times, but received later
additions from time to time. The present passage
occurs in an appendix of fasts in Neubauer's edition,
Anecdota Oxoniensia, Semitic Series, vol. i, part vi,
Mediaeval Jewish Chronicles ii, Oxford 1895.J
On the eighth 1 day of Tebeth 2 the Law was written 3
in Greek in the days of King Tolmai,<l and darkness 5
came upon the world for three days.
( 2) MAsSEKETH SoPHERIM (" The Tractate of the
Scribes"), I. 7-10 (ed. Joel Miiller, Leipzig,
1878).
[ A post-Talmudic treatise on the rules for writing the
rolls of the Law and kindred matters. Though not
earlier than the eighth or ninth century A.D., it includes
1 One Oxford MS reads " seventh."
2 The tenth month in tbe Jewish year (=December-January).
3 Mere transliteration of the Hebrew in Greek characters, not
translation, may be intended.
i j?tolemy. ~ Lit. "the darkness;" ; cl. EK. x. 2I f,
89
90 APPENDIX
much ancient matter. The first of the two narratives
below, with its unique reference to the five (instead of
the usual seventy or seventy-two elders) bears the marks
of high antiquity; the second is of later origin and finds
parallels in the two Talmuds and elsewhere. Of the
thirteen or more passages in the Law, cited in this and
the two following extracts, which are s:iid to have been
altered by the elders, four only appear in the "altered"
form in our MSS of the LXX; two more of the variants
are attested in African versions. Of the remainder, some
are unmistakably, and all may be, mere variants in a
Hebrew text; and it has been suggested (Frankel, Vor
studien 31) that they were originally cited as readings in
the Hebrew codex of the Law presented to King Ptolemy,
J
not in a Greek translation made from that codex.
7 Tlze Law must not be written in ordinary Hebrew 1
nor in Aramaic nor in the Median language nor in Greek.
A copy written in any foreign tongue or foreign charac
ters shall not be used for reading in the services, but only
one written in the Assyrian characters.2
8 It happened once that five elders 3 wrote 4 the Law
in Greek for King Tolmai; and that day was a hard
day for Israel, like the day on which Israel made the
golden calf,5 because the Law was not capable of being
interpreted according to all its requirements.
1 The older and "common Semitic character used alike in
ancient times by the l\foabites, Hebrews, Aramaeans and Phoeni
cians '' (Driver, Notes on the Heb. text ef Samuel, Introd. § I).
2 The later square Hebrew characters,
3 One MS "they wrote," omitting "five elders," Frankd
( Ueber den Einjluss der palast. Exegese) thinks that we have here
a true tradition and that it is confirmed by indications, which he
finds in the LXX text, that each book of the Pentateuch was
rendered hy a separate translator. Grat, adopts this theory.
• This might refer to mere transcription of the Hebrew text in
Greek characters,
5 Ex, xxxii,
APPENDIX gr
Again, it happened to King Tolmai that he as-
9
sembled seventy 1 elders and placed them in seventy 1
cells,2 and did not make known to them wherefore he
had assembled them; but he came in to each of them
in turn and said to them, "Write me out the Law of
Moses your master." God put counsel into the heart
of every one of them, that they were all of one mind,
and they wrote out for him the Law by itself.3 But
they altered thirteen 4 passages in it, and they are
these :5-
(1) "God created in the beginning": 6
( 2) "And God said, I will make man m image
and in likeness " : 7
(3) "And he finished on the sixth day and rested
on the seventh " : 8
(4) "Male and female created he him": 9
(5) "Go to, let me go down and there confound
their language " : 10
1 v.l. "seventy-two."
2 Lit. "houses."
3 The writer emphasizes the limitation of their task to the Law
alone.
4 Actually fourteen are cited. No. (ro), omitted in the Jerus.
Talmud, may be a later addition.
6 The last four words are omitted in some MSS.
~ Gen. i. I ; instead of the order " In the beginning created
God," etc. The divine name occupies the first place. LXX keeps
the usual order and, except as indicated, the normal text in the
passages·which follow.
' Gen. i. 26 ; instead of " Let us make . . . in our image, after
our Ii keness." The polytheistic plural is a voided.
8 Gen. ii. 2; so LXX, instead of "And on the seventk day
God finished his work," etc. Text due to Sabbatarian scruples.
• Gen. i. 27, v. 2; instead of "created he them," which words
are omitted by one Egyptian version of LXX (the Bohairic).
Trarlition said that the first man, before the creation of Eve, was
of rlouble sex and had tw·o faces.
10 Gen. xi. 7; instead of "Let us go down." Polytheistic plural
again avoided, ·
92 APPENDIX
(6) "And Sarah laughed within herself saying": 1
(7) "For in their anger they slew an ox, and in
their self-will they uprooted a stall'' : 2
(8) "And Moses took his wife and his sons and
set them upon a bearer of men " : 3
(9) "Now the sojourning of the children of Israel,
which they sojourned in the land of Egypt and in
the land of Canaan and in the rest of the lands,
was four hundred and thirty years" : 4
(10) "And upon the Za(utim of the children of
Israel he laid not his hand" : 5
( 11) "I have not taken one desirable thing from
them": 6
( 12) "And the short-footed one" : 7
(13) "Which the LORD thy God hath divided to
1 Gen. xviii. 12; a mere difference by one letter in the spelling
of the Hebrew word "laughed," perhaps to distinguish Sarah's
laughter from Abraham's (Gen. xvii. 17).
" Gen. xlix. 6 ; for '' they slew a man, ••. they honghed an
ox." The alteration, made from a desire to clear Levi of man
slaughter, has perhaps affected the Ethiopic version of LXX
("cities" for "an ox"). "A stall"; 'ebus. Friedmann suggests
an allusion to Apis and Egyptian idolatry.
3 Ex, iv. 20; for " ..• upon an ass." Alteration from regard
to Moses' dignity. LXX "upon the beasts of burden."
' Ex. xii. 40; "and in the land of Canaan and in the rest of the
lands" inserted on chronological grounds. LXX has part of this,
"and in the land of Canaan," with the further addition (in many
MSS) "they and their fathers."
5 Ex, xxiv. II; for "And upon the nobles," etc. The Hebrew
word occurs here only in this sense, lit. "corners," so "supports."
The meaning of Za{u{im is obscure; probably it is a translitera
tion of the Gr. zethai (="commissioners") or zaetetai = diaeMtai
("arbitrators"). LXX (" the elect") does not help to explain it.
6 Numb. xd. 15; for '' one ass." LXX has this variant, "de
sirable thing" ; the Hebrew word differs from "ass" by a slight
change in one letter.
7 Read, with a change of ·one letter, "the hairy-footed one."
Deut. xiv. 7 (cf. Lev. xi. 5 f), "and the hare" (hd-anubeth);
LXX "the hairy-foot" {dasupoda), the later Greek name for the hare
instead of the c;:lassical word ta;vs. S~e further on this word below,
APPENDIX 93
give light unto all the peoples under the whole
heaven": 1
(r4) "Which I have not commanded them to
serve": 2
They do not write t/1~ Law in gold letters. It hap- ro
pened in the case of the copy of their Law which went
to them of Alexandria 3 that a11 the divine names' were
written in gold ; and when the matter came before the
Wise, they said, "Put it away." 6
(3) TALMUD OF JERUSALEM (PALESTINIAN TALMUD),
Megilla I. 71 d (bottom) (cf. Mechilta on Exod. xii. 40)
Thirteen passages were altered by the Wise for King
Tolmai. They wrote thus for him.
[Then follow the passages cited in the previous extract,
except that No. (ro) is omitted; the order of Nos. (3)
and (4) is transposed, as also of (r r) and (12). No. (12),
here No. ( 1 o ), appears in the following form :-]
And for "the hare" [ ha-arnebeth] they wrote "the
short-footed one"; 6 the name of the mother of
King Tolmai was Arnabtha.7
(4) TALMUD OF BABYLON, Megilla 9a.
[The preceding Mishna, after stating that the books
of Scripture may be written in any foreign language,
1 Deut. iv. 19. The words "to give light" are added to empha
size the fact that the luminaries were not given to be worshipped.
2 Deu!. xvii. 3. The addition of the words "to serve" is similar
to that in the previous passage ; it appears in c>ne Egyptian version
made from the LXX, the Bohairic (/acei-e).
3 Another reading "to Alexander."
4 Lit, "mentions,"" allusions" (to the Name).
5 i.e. in the Geniza, or synagogue lumber-room, as unfit for use
in the services. Cf. Aristeas, § 176, where the whole of the MS
is said to have been written in gold.
0 Read "the hairy-footed one" ; see above.
7 See note on the next extract.
94 APPENDIX
adds the stricter ruling of Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel
hat they might be written only in Greek.]
Rabbi Jehuda said that the permission of our Rabbis
as to writing in Greek extends only to the book of the
Law, and that because of what happened in the case of
King Tolmai. We are taught thus :-1
It happened to King Tolmai that he assembled seventy
two elders and collected them in seventy-two cells 2 and
did not reveal to them wherefore he had assembled
them ; but he came iri to each of them in turn and said
to them, "Write me out the Law of Moses your master."
The Holy One (blessed be He !) put counsel into the
heart of every one of them, that they were all of one
mind, and they wrote for him as follows.
[Then follow the fourteen passages quoted in .ll[asseketh
Sophen·m (above), to which is added a fifteenth, between
Nos. (9) and (10), viz.:-]
'' And he sent the Za{u/im of the children of
Israel." 3
[Other variations from Mas. Soph. are that to passage
(4) the note is added "And they did not write, 'He
created them'"; in passage (9) the words "and in the
land of Canaan" are not inserted, and the number of the
years is, in some MSS, 400; and passage (12), which
here occupies the fifteenth and final place, appears in the
following expanded form :-]
"And they wrote for him 'the short-footed one,'
and they did not write for him 'the hare' [ha-arnebeth],
because of the wife of Tolmai, whose name was
Arnebeth, lest he should say, 'The Jews have
1 i. e. "There is a tradition" (outside the Mishna).
2 Lit. "houses."
3 Ex. xxiv. 5; for '' And he sent young men," etc. For Za/u(im
see note on passage (rn) under Mas. Soph. (above).
APPENDIX 95
mocked me by introducing the name of my wife
into the Law.'" 1
(B) Jewish (Hellenistic).
(5) (PsEUDo-)ARISTOBULUS, as cited by Eusebius,
Preparation for the Gospel, XIII. 12.
[The work, of which this fragment, with a few others,
has survived, consisted of an allegorical and philosophical
explanation of the Mosaic Law. It purports to have
been addressed to King Ptolemy Philometor (182-146
B.c.), but its claim to so high an antiquity has, like that
of the Letter of Aristeas, been disputed by many recent
critics.]
It is evident that Plato was a follower of our code of
laws, evident too that he diligently studied all their
details. For before the time of Demetrius of Phalerum,
before the dominion of Alexander and of the Persians, a
translation had been made by others of the narrative of
the leading forth of the Hebrews, our fellow countrymen,2
out of Egypt, and of the divine manifestation in all which
befell them, and of the occupation of the promised land,
1 We have here a curious distortion of an older story attaching to
the LXX word for "hare" (dasupous, "hairy-foot"). Doubtless
the original explanation was that the translators avoided the classical
word, lag8s, for the unclean animal, because it might be construed
as a reflection on the name of Lagos, the father of Ptolemy I, and
on the dynasty of the Lagidae. The story was forgotten and another
confused explanation took its place. Sopherim gives the LXX
rendering without comment ; in the Jerusalem Talmud the king's
father is replaced by his mother, and she again in the Bab.
Talmud by his wife, and the point of the story is now found
apparently in a resemblance between the Hebrew word for "hare,'
arnebeth, and the royal name Arsinoe,
2 Lit. "(fellow-)citizens."
96 APPENDIX
with a detailed statem·ent of the entire Law.1 It is thus
abundantly clear that the aforesaid philosopher has de
rived many things therifrom; for he was a man of great
learning, like Pythagoras, who also borrowed many of
our doctrines and incorporated them in his decrees.
But the complete translation of the Law and all its con
tents was made under the king surnamed Philadelphus,
thy 2 ancestor, who displayed the greatest zeal,3 while
Demetrius of Phalerum busied himself with the necessary
arrangements.
(6) PHILO, On the Life of Moses, II. 5-7.
5 The admiration in which the reverend Law has been
held, not by Jews alone but also by the rest of the
world, is evident alike from what has already been said
and from the story which I proceed to tell. In the olden
days the laws were written in the Chaldee 4 tongue, and
for a long while so they continued without any change in
their language, when as yet they had not displayed their
beauty to the rest of men. But when, through the con
stant daily study and practice of these laws by their
followers, others also awoke to a knowledge of them, and
their fame spread far and wide-for beautiful objects,
though for a while they may be obscured through envy,
by a kindly law of nature again in due season recover
their brilliance-certain persons feeling aggrieved that
the laws should find a place with half only, the non
Hellenic 6 portion, of the human race, while the Hellenic
half should have no share in them whatever, applied
1 The alleged pre-Septuagint version is represented as comprising
at least portions of the last five books of the Hexateuch.
2 Ptolemy VII (Philometor) is addressed.
3 Or "greater am bit ion" (viz. than the earlier translators).
• i. e. Hebrew. Philo uses the words '' Chaklaean " and
" llebrcw" indiscriminately.
• Lit. "barbarian.''
APPENDIX 97
themselves to their translation. And since the task was
great and for the general good, it was entrusted not to
common folk nor to ordinary rulers, whose number is
· legion, but to kings and to the most notable among them.
Ptolemy, surnamed Philadelphus, was the third in the
dynasty which dated from Alexander 1 the conqueror of
Egypt, and in the kingly virtues surpassed not only the
monarchs of his time but all who ever were before him.
To this very day, so many generations later, the fame is
sung of him who left, throughout cities and countries,
such abundant evidences and memorials of his magna
nimity, insomuch that it has now become almost a
proverbial saying to describe acts of exceeding munifi
cence and buildings on a mighty scale, after his name, as
"Philadelphian." In short, the house of the Ptolemies
flourished above all other kingdoms, and among the
Ptolemies Philadelphus ranked highest. The united
achievements of all the rest hardly equalled the laudable
deeds of this one monarch ; he was like the directing
mind in a living organism, the head, as it were, of the
kingly body.
Such, then, was the man who, conceiving a passion- 6
ate desire for our code of laws, proposed to have the
Chaldee 2 rendered into the Greek tongue, and straight
way sent ambassadors unto the high priest and king of
Judaea (for the same man held both offices) to declare
his will and to exhort him to select according to their
merits persons to translate the Law. And he, with
natural delight and supposing that the king's zeal for so
high a task was not uninspired by divine providence,
looked out the most approved of the Hebrews who were
with him, men who had been trained in the Hellenic
1 Lit. "third from Alexander," i. e. his second successor.
2 i. e. Hebrew (as above).
G
98 APPENDIX
learning in addition to that of their country,1 and gladly
despatched them. On their arrival they were invited
to a banquet and entertained and feasted their host in
return with clever and earnest speeches.2 For he made
trial of each man's wisdom, propounding novel and un
usual questions, while they, the occasion not permitting
of a long discourse, solved the conundrums which were
put to them with the ready sagacity and pointed repartee
of the speaker of terse apophthegms.
After passing this scrutiny, they proceeded straight
way to discharge the duties of their honourable embassy;
and reflecting with one another upon the magnitude of
the task of giving an oracular interpretation of divinely
inspired laws, being under constraint neither to detract
ought nor to add nor to transpose, 3 but to preserve their
original form and type, they looked for the purest spot
in tl1e district, without the city. For the parts within the
walls, being full of living creatures of all sorts, were, by
reason of diseases and deaths and the unholy actions
of those in sound health, viewed with suspicion. The
island of Pharos lies in front of Alexandria ; its neck of
land with half-submerged sandbanks stretches along over
against the city and is washed by a sea which is not deep
close inshore but for the most part consists of lagoons,
so that the mighty roar and crash of the waves breaking
a very great distance away are deadened. This spot out
of all the surrounding district they selected as the most
suitable haven wherein to find peace and quietness and
for solitary communion between their souls and the laws.
So here they abode, and taking the holy books they ex
tended their hands with them to heaven, entreating God
that they might not fail in their purpose. And He
1 Cf. Arist. § 121. Philo, it is to be observed, names no number.
• Arist. §§ 187 ff. 3 Cf. Arist. § 310 f.
APPENDIX 99
granted their prayers, in order that the more part, or
indeed the whole, of the human race might reap the
benefit of access, for the amendment of life, to our wise 1
and wholly excellent ordinances.
In secret they sat, with none present save the 7
elements of nature-earth, water, air, heaven-whose
origin it was their first task to expound (for the cos
mogony holds the first place in our laws) ; and, as men
possessed, they produced not divers interpretations, but
all alike used the same words and phrases, as though
some invisible prompter whispered in the ears of each.
And yet who does not know that every language, and
Greek beyond all others, is rich in words and that one
may by circumlocution and paraphrase clothe the same
thought in divers forms, varying the style to fit the
occasion? Yet this, they say, did not happen with these
laws ef ours; no, the appropriate technical words t"n the
translation corresponded exactly with the technical words
in the original, the Greek with the Chaldee,2 being
admirably adapted to fit the subject-matter. Just in the
same way, I suppose, as in geometry and dialectics, the
meanings of the terms used do not admit of any variety
of definition, but that which is laid down in the first
instance is retained throughout, so, it seems, these men
discovered the words which coincided with the subject
matter and which were alone, or most nearly, capable of
rendering the sense transparently clear. The surest
proof of the foregoing statement is this. If Chaldaeans 2
learn Greek or Greeks Chaldee 2 and they read both
writings, the Chaldee 2 and the translation, they are
filled with amazement and veneration for what appear
as sister writings or rather as one and the same work
1 Lit. "philosophical."
1 :°. e. Hebrew ( !IeLrews),
IOO APPENDIX
as regards both subject-matter and phraseology, and
they call those men not translators but priests of the
mysteries and prophets, to whom it was vouchsafed with
sincerity of mind to enter into 1 the spotlessly pure spirit
of Moses.
For this cause there is held to this day every year a
festival and public assembly on the island of Pharos, to
which not Jews only but multitudes from other nations
cross the water, to pay reverence to the spot on which the
translation first shed its light, and to give thanks to God
for a benefit, ancient yet ever new. After the prayers
and thanksgivings some pitch tents on the sea-shore,
while others recline on the sand, and all keep feast in
the open with relatives and friends, regarding the beach
on that occasion as more luxurious than a royal palace.
So desirable and highly to be prized do our laws appear
to all alike, whether commoners or rulers, and that
though for a Jong time the fortunes of the race have
been at a low ebb, and nations that are not at their
prime are wont to suffer eclipse. If, then, there should
come an opening to a brighter future, what an advance
may we not hope will be made? 2 I suppose that all
nations would forsake their own customs and bidding fare
well to their country's laws would come to pay honour
to these laws alone; for with the revival of the nation's
fortunes they will recover their brilliance and rob aU
others of their brightness even as the sun at his rising
blots out the stars.
(7) JOSEPHUS
(a) Jewish Antiquities, I. 3 (§§ 10-12, Niese).
I found that the second of the Ptolemies, a king who
was zealous beyond all others in the cause of learning
1 Lit. "run (o,-keep pace) with." Cf. Rom. xi. r2.
APPENDIX IOI
and in the collecting of books, had a special ambition to
produce a version in the Greek tongue of our Law and
the polity which is ordered in accordance therewith. I
found too that Eleazar, who came behind none of our
high priests in virtue, did not grudge the aforesaid king
the enjoyment of this benefit, which he would doubtless
have denied him, had it not been the custom of our
nation to keep no good thing a secret to themselves. I
considered accordingly that it became me also to imitate
the high priest's magnanimity and to suppose that even
now there are many who share the king's love of learn
ing. For even he did not obtain the whole record and
so forestall me, since it was the Law alone which was
delivered him by those who were sent to Alexandria as
interpreters.
(b) Ib. XII. 2. I (§ I I).
Alexander reigned twelve years, and after him Ptolemy
Soter forty-one years, and then Philadelphus succeeded
to the throne of Egypt and occupied it for thirty-nine
years. He translated the Law and liberated from bondage
those of the inhabitants of Jerusalem who were bonds
men in Egypt, in number about one hundred and twenty
thousand, on the following grounds.
[Then follows a free paraphrase of a large part of the
Letter of Aristeas.]
(C) Christian.
(8) JUSTIN, Apology, l. 3r.
Now when Ptolemy, the king of the Egyptians, was
forming a library and endeavoured to make a collection
of all men's writings, he heard tell, among the rest, of
these prophecies, and sent to Herod who was then
king of the Jews with a request that the books of the
IOZ APPENDIX
prophecies might be transmitted to him. And king
Herod sent them, written in their native Hebrew tongue
of which I have spoken. But, since the Egyptians were
unacquainted with the things written therein, he sent
yet again and requested him to despatch men to render
them into the Greek language. This was done and the
books remained with the Egyptians and are there to
this day.
(9) PSEUDO-JUSTIN, Exhortation to Greeks, 13.
Ptolemy, king of Egypt, formed a library in Alexandria
and collected books from every quarter and filled it.
Then, learning that certain ancient histories written in
Hebrew characters had been preserved with scrupulous
care, and being desirous to know what was written therein,
he sent to Jerusalem for seventy wise men, who were
familiar with the speech of both Greeks and Hebrews,
and bade them translate the books. And, in order that
they should be free from all disturbance and the sooner
complete their task, he gave orders for their accommoda
tion not in the city itself, but seven furlongs 1 away, where
the Pharos 2 was built, and that little cells, in number as
many as the translators, should be erected there, to the
end that every man should execute his translation apart
by himself. He charged the attendant ministers to see
that they wanted for nothing, but to keep them from
communicating with each other, in order that their agree
ment might afford a further proof of the accuracy of the
translation. When he found that the seventy men had
not merely expressed the same ideas but had employed
the very same phraseology, and had not so much as in
a single word failed to agree with each other, but had
written on the same themes in the same language, he
1 Gr, " stades/' 2 i,e. the lighthouse on the island,
APPENDIX
103
was amazed, and, believing that the translation had been
written by divine power, he recognized that they merited
every honour, as men beloved of God. So he bestowed
many presents 1 upon them and bade them return to
their own country; the books, as he was like to do,2 he
held to be divine and laid up in his library.
These things which we declare unto you, men of
Greece, are no myths nor fictitious history. We our
selves have been in Alexandria and have seen the traces,
still preserved, of the cells in the island of Pharos, and
have heard this story which we tell you from the in
habitants, who have had it handed down as a tradition
of their country. You may learn it from others also,
and chiefly from those wise and distinguished men who
have written of it, Philo and Josephus, but there are
many others besides.
(10) JRENAEUS, Against all Heresies, III. xxi. 2.
Before the Romans had established their empire and
when the Macedonians were still masters of Asia, Ptolemy
son of Lagus, in his ambition to adorn the library which
he had built in Alexandria with the writings of all men,
such at least as were of merit, besought of the inhabitants
of Jerusalem that he might have their Scriptures rendered
into the Greek tongue. And they, being at that time
still subject to the Macedonians, sent of their number
those who were most proficient in the Scriptures and
in both languages, seventy elders, to Ptolemy to do
his will.3 The king, desiring to make trial of them
privily, and fearing lest by some mutual covenant
1 Cf. Arist. § 318 (with the MS reading).
2 Or, ""'as was meet."
• Or, according to another reading, "God having wrought that
which he desired."
APPENDIX
104
they might through their translation conceal the truth
contained in the Scriptures, separated them from each
other and commanded the whole company to translate
the same portion of Scripture ; and this he did with all
the books. Now when they were assembled together in
Ptolemy's presence and compared every man his transla
tion with his neighbour's, God was glorified, and the Scrip
tures were recognized as indeed divine, in that they had
all expressed the same things by the same phrases and
the same words from beginning to end, insomuch that
even the Gentiles who were present perceived that the
Scriptures had been translated through the inspiration
of God ....
For it was one and the self-same Spirit of God, who
4
in the prophets proclaimed what and in what manner
should be the coming of the Lord and in the elders
interpreted well what had been well prophesied.
( r r) CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA, Stromateis, I, § r 48
(409 P.).
[Based on Irenaeus, or a common source, and Aristo
bulus.]
They say that the Scriptures, both of the Law and of
the prophets, were translated from the Hebrew tongue
into Greek under King Ptolemy, son of Lagus, or, as
some assert, under him who was surnamed Philadelphus,
Demetrius of Phalerum displaying the greatest zeal in
this undertaking and carefully supervising the details of
the business. It was in the days when the Macedonians
were still masters of Asia that the king was fired with the
ambition to adorn the library which he had founded in
Alexandria with all manner of writings, and among other
requests asked the men of Jerusalem to translate the
prophecies in their keeping into the Greek tongue.
APPENDIX 105
And they, being still subject to the Macedonians, 149
selected from the most renowned among them seventy
elders, skilled in the Scriptures and acquainted with the
Greek language, and sent them to him with the sacred
books. Each man in turn and apart translated each
several prophecy, and all the translatio_ns when compared
conspired together both in thought and diction ; tfor the
will of God had been 1 attuned to 2t Greek ears. And
surely it was not strange that the inspiration of God
who had given the prophecy operated to make of the
translation also as it were a Greek prophecy; seeing that,
when the Scriptures had perished in the captivity under
Nebuchadnezzar, in the days of Artaxerxes, the king of
the Persians, Esdras the Levite and priest was inspired
to revive and to prophesy afresh all the ancient Scriptures.
( 1 2) TERTULLIAN, Apology, 18.
The most erudite of the Ptolomies, whom they surname
Philadelphus, and one who wa·s most deeply versed in
all literature, when in his passion for collecting books
he was, I suppose, emulating Pisistratus, among other
records whose title to fame was due to their antiquity or
some curious lore, besought the Jews also for their own
literature, of which they were the sole possessors, in
its native tongue. This he did on the suggestion of
Demetrius of Phalerum, the most eminent philologist of
his time, to whom he had entrusted the superintendence
of the volumes. For at all times prophets had arisen
from among them and had pleaded with them, as being
a nation who in virtue of the favour shown to their
fathers were God's own peculiar people. Those who
1 Wendland emend, "for by the will of God they [the transla
tions] had been," etc.
tt
• Or "studied" or "rehearsed for." Meaning of doubtful.
I06 APPENDIX
are now Jews were once Hebrews, and consequently
had their Hebrew characters 1 and language. To guard,
however, against misunderstanding, Ptolomy had further
placed at his disposal by the Jews the services of two
and seventy translators, whom even the philosopher
Menedemus, the upholder of Providence, regarded with
esteem on account of the opinion which they held in
common with himself.2 You have confirmation in this
in what Aristaeus has stated. Thus the king left the
records in Greek and accessible to all.3 To this day
the libraries of Ptolomy are shewn in the Serapeum
with the actual Hebrew documents.
(r3) ANATOLIUS, Canons concerning the Passover
(as quoted by Eusebius, Eccles. Hist., VII. 32).
[The writer, an Alexandrian by birth, and in the latter
part of the third century bishop of th~ Syrian Laodicea,
among other authorities on the method of calculating the
time of the Passover, mentions]
The famous Aristobulus, who was enrolled among the
Seventy who translated the holy and divine Scriptures of
the Hebrews for Ptolemy Philadelphus and his father;
he also addressed to those same kings books in which he
expounded the meaning of the Mosaic law.
(r4) EusEBrns, Preparation/or the Gospel, VIII. 1.
Before calling my witnesses, I think it necessary to
explain to my readers how the oracles of the Hebrews
passed into Greek hands, the manner of the translation
of the divine Scriptures with which that nation had been
entrusted, the number and nature of the translators, and
the royal zeal which brought about the version into the
1 Or" literature." 2 Cf. Arist. § 201.
3 The sentence might possibly mean '' He (i. e. Aristeas) has left
records to this effect in Greek," etc.
APPENDIX
Greek tongue. The narrative will not fail to contribute
to my demonstration of the Preparation for the Gospel.
When the time was close at hand in which, under the
Roman Empire, the salutary preaching concerning our
Saviour was destined to shed forth its light upon all
men, and there was thus an exceptional and imperative
reason why the prophecies concerning Him and the life
of the divinely favoured Hebrews of old and the lessons
of their pious teaching, which for long ages had been
veiled in their country's language, should now at length
be transmitted to all the nations, who were to be intro
duced to the privileges of a' knowledge of God, God
Himself, the author of these benefits, anticipating the
future with divine foreknowledge, providentially ordained
that the predictions about Him Who was shortly to
appear as Saviour of all men and to become for all
nations under the sun the Teacher of pious worship of
the one supreme God, should, by means of an accurate
version deposited in public libraries, be revealed to the
world and come to light. It was King Ptolemy into
whose heart He put it to fulfil this task, in preparation,
it would seem, for the impending time when all nations
would participate in these blessings.
For to those treasures which we should not otherwise
have wrested from the Jews, who through envy of us
would have concealed their oracles, to these we gained
access. through the translation, dispensed by divine
providence and executed by men who for wisdom and
learning in their country's lore were held in high repute
by their nation.
The story is told by Aristaeus, a man of exceptional
erudition, who moreover took part in the events which
happened under the second Ptolemy, surnamed Phila
delphus. For it was in his reign and through his zeal
108 APPENDIX
that the translation of the Jewish Scriptures was pro
duced and deemed worthy of a place in the libraries of
Alexandria.
But it is time to let our author speak for himself in
his own words.
[Extracts from the Letter here follow.]
(15) CHRYSOSTOM, Homilies on St. Matthew, V. 2.
The Seventy may justly be deemed more trustworthy
than the rest of the translators. The others translated
after the coming of Christ, continuing to be Jews, and
might with justice be suspected of having spoken rather
from enmity and of obscuring the prophecies of set
purpose. But the Seventy, in that they approached
their task 1 a hundred or more years before the coming
of Christ 2 and were so many, are above all such sus
picion, and by reason of their date, their number and
their agreement may well deserve the greater credence.
(16) EPIPHANIUS, On Weights and Measures, 3-11.
[This diffuse and diverting account-in his credulity
Epiphanius is like another Herodotus among the Egyptian
priests-is interspersed with references, here omitted, to
the later Greek versions of Aquila, etc., and to the
symbols used in Origen's Hexapla. The portions en
closed in brackets ( ) occur only in the Syriac Version
edited by Lagarde.]
3 They were seventy-two in number and were shut
up from morn till eve in the Pharian island, in the region
1 With a slight emendation we might read "in that they came
to the same result" (i. e. produced identical versions}.
2 In his Homilies on Genesis, IV. 4, he puts the translation
under "a certain King Ptolemy not many years before the corning
of Christ." Other dates mentioned are 230 B.C. (ps.-Athanasins,
Synopsis), 31 B.C. (ps.-Theodoret), and 301 B.C, (Nicetas, Catena
on the Psalms).
APPENDIX 109
called the upper country,1 over against Alexandria, in
six and thirty cells, one pair in each cell. At even they
would cross over in thirty-six skiffs to the palace of
Ptolemy Philadelphus and feast with him. They slept
in pairs in thirty-six bed-chambers. Such was the life
they led, to the end that they should have no collusion
with each other and should produce an unadulterated
translation. The thirty-six cells which I mentioned were
erected by the aforesaid Ptolemy in the island across
the water. He made them in two compartments 2 and
shut in the men two and two, as I said; and he shut in
with them two ministering attendants to cook and to
wait upon them, and they had shorthand writers 3 in
addition. He did not so much as make windows in the
walls of those cells, but had what are called "skylights"'
opened in the roofs above their heads. So they lived
from morn till eve under lock and key and so they
translated. To each pair one book was delivered, that
is to say, the book of the Genesis of the world to one
pair, the Exodus of the children of Israel to a second
pair, Leviticus to a third, and so on. Thus were trans
lated the scriptural and canonical 5 books, twenty-seven
in all, or twenty-two if the reckoning is made to
correspond to the number of letters in the Hebrew
alphabet. •..
. . . Thus then were translated these seven and 5
twenty books, also reckoned as two and twenty. They
included the Psalter and the additional matter in Jere
miah, I mean his Lamentations and the Epistles of
1 Cf. Arist. § 3or, "the northern district."
2 Gr. "double."
3 Or "ready scribes.'' For Greek shorthand see Milligan,
N. T. Documents, Note C.
4 Cf. Arist. § 307, "brilliant light," lit. " down-shining."
6 Lit. " in the testament."
I 10 APPENDIX
Baruch ; although with the Hebrews the Epistles find
no place and the book of Lamentations is the only
writing attached to Jeremiah. The method was as already
described: the books were distributed periodically to
each pair of translators, passing from the first pair to
the second, and again from the second to the third in
rotation.1 Thus each book was translated thirty-six
times; such is the story which is told. There were also
twenty-two of the apocryphal books.2
6 When the work was completed, the king took his
seat on a lofty throne, and thirty-six readers (sat at his
feet 3) having the thirty-six reproductions of each book,
while one held a copy of the Hebrew volume. Then
one reader recited and the rest diligently attended ; and
there was found (no) discrepancy between the translations,
but a marvellous act of God, that it might be known that
it was through the possession of the gift of the Holy
Spirit that those men agreed in their interpretation. And
where they added a word, they all added it in common,
and where they omitted the omission was made by all
alike; of the omitted portions there is no need, but of
the additions there is need. . . .
We must now sketch the plot of the story which is
9
told.' A knowledge of these matters will be profitable
to thee; the narrative here attempted 5 will indicate who
each translator 6 was and whence he came, his date and
nationality and the reason why he became a translator.
The first to translate this same 7 Holy Scripture from
1 Text emended. 1 Contrast p. II4 below.
• Or '' on low stools."
• Or "of the events of which we have spoken." He proceeds
to describe, out of order, and probably from another source, the
preliminary events which led up to the translation.
• Meaning uncertain.
• The later translators are included as well as th.: LXX.
' Text uncertain.
APPENDIX II I
Hebrew into Greek were seventy-two in number, who
produced this same 1 primitive translation under Ptolemy
Philadelphus. They were selected from the twelve
tribes of Israel, six men from each tribe, as Aristaeus
related in his published work. (And their names are as
follows:-
0/ the first, from the tribe of Reubel 2 :-
Jose, Hezekiah, Zechariah, J ohanan, Hezekiah,
Elisha.
Of the second, from the tribe of Simeon :-
Judah, Simeon, Samuel, Adai,3 Mattithah, Salmai.
Of the third, from the tribe of Levi : -
Nehemiah, Joseph, Theodosius, Basa, Orniah,
Daki.
Of,the fourth, from the tribe of Judah:-
Jo nathan, Abrai, 4 Elisha, Hananiah, Zechariah,
Hilkiah.5
Of the fifth, from the tribe of Issachar :-
Isaac, Jacob, Jeshua, Sambat, Simeon, Levi.
Of the sixth, from the tribe of Zebulun :-
Judah, Joseph, Simeon, Zechariah, Samuel, Salmai.
Of the seventh, from the tribe of Gad :-
Sambat, Zedekiah, Jacob, Isaac, Jesse, Matthi.
Of the eighth, from the tribe of Asher :-
Theodosius, Jason, J eshua, Theodotus, J ohanan,
Jonathan.
Of the ninth, from the tribe of Dan:-
Theophilus, Abram, Arsam, Jason, Endemiah
Daniel.
1 Text uncertain.
• Another form of Reuben used by Josephus (Roubelos).
3 Or Adi. ' Or Abri.
0 This name has dropped out of t.11 the Aristeas MSS.
II2 APPENDIX
Of the tenth, from the tribe of Naphthali :-
Eremiah, Eliezer, Zechariah, Baniah, Elisha, Dathai.1
Of the eleventh, from the tribe of Joseph:-
Samuel, Josephus, Judah, Jonathan, Caleb, Dositheus.
Of the twelfth, from the tribe of Benjamin:-
Isaelus, Johanan, Theodosius, Arsam, Avitus,2
Ezekiel.
These are the names of the seventy-two translators before
mentione-d.)
Now the successor of the first Ptolemy and the second
of the kings of Alexandria was, as we said, Ptolemy sur
named Philadelphus. He was a lover of all that is
beautiful and of literature, and built a library in that
same city of Alexander in the Bruchium so-called (now
an uninhabited district in the said city), which he placed
under the charge of one Demetrius the Phalarene. Him
he bade collect the books in existence in every quarter
of the world, and he wrote letters importuning every
king and governor on earth to send ungrudgingly the
books (that were within his realm or government); I
mean the works of poets and prose writers, orators 3 and
sophists, physicians, professors of medicine, historians
and so on. One day, when the business was proceeding
apace and the books were being assembled from all
quarters, the king asked his librarian how many volumes
had (already) been collected in th~ library. He made
answer to the king and said ; " There are already fifty
four thousand eight hundred, more or less. But I' hear
that there is still a great mass of writings in the world,
among the Ethiopians and Indians, the Persians and
Elamites and Babylonians, the Assyrians and Chaldaeans,
1 Or Dathi. 2 Or Abitus.
3 Or " rhetoricians." 4 Gr. "we."
APPENDIX 113
among the Romans also and the Phoenicians, the Syrians
and the (Romans) 1 in Hellas." They were not as yet
called Romans but Latins. " There are, moreover, with
them of Jerusalem and J udaea certain divine books of
the prophets, which tell of God and the creation of the
world and contain all other teaching that is for the
general good. Wherefore, 0 king, if it is thy Majesty's
pleasure to send for these also, do thou write to the
doctors in Jerusalem, and they will send them to thee,
that so thou mayest lay up the self-same books in the
self-same library of thy Reverence." Thereupon the
king wrote a letter as follows :-
" King Ptolemy to the (doctors) of the Jews in 10
Jerusalem many greetings. I have built a library and
collected a multitude of books from each nation and
stored them therein. And hearing that with you also
there are current 2 certain books of prophets which tell
of God and the creation of the world, and being earnestly
desirous to consecrate them with the rest, I am writing
to bid you send these to us. That my earnest desire in
such a suit is prompted not by idle curiosity or malice
but by a regard for their honour, and that this request
of mine is made to shew my good faith and friendship
towards you, you will recognize if you call to mind the
benevolence which we shewed to you ( on a former
occasion). You remember, I ween, how that, when
many had been taken captives from your country and
had been brought into our country of Egypt, I et them
go and dismissed them free, with abundance of supplies, -
alter taking thought for them with no ordinary care;
insomuch that I healed those among them who were
1 Added in the Syriac text; with this reading Hellas apparentlr,
stands for Magna Graecia. The Greek has '' and them of Hellas. '
2 Or " And hearing a report that there are with you also."
H
II4 APPENDIX
stricken and (likewise) let them go, and the naked did
I clothe. And now too I am sending a golden table
adorned with the most costly precious stones, of a
hundred talents weight, in the room of the table that
was taken from the holy place at Jerusalem, with gifts
and votive treasures 1 for the sacred place. I have
recounted these things that ye may know that it is with
pious aspiration 2 that I ask for the books."
So the letter was despatched and the gifts (likewise).
And they, when they received the letter (and read it)
and beheld the gifts, were filled with exceeding great
joy. And without delay they had transcribed in Hebrew
characters of gold the books which I have already
enumerated, two and twenty canonical and seventy-two 3
apocryphal, and sent them off. The king on receiving
them looked into them and, being unable to read what
was written in Hebrew characters and in the Hebrew
tongue, was constrained to write a second letter to them
and to ask for interpreters capable of rendering for him
the Hebrew into Greek. The contents of the letter were
as follows :-
I 1 " King Ptolemy to the doctors of piety that are in
J ernsalem many greetings. ' Treasure that is hid and a
fountain that is sealed, what profit is in these twain? ' 4
Even so are the contents of the books which ye have
sent us. For, since we are unable to read what ye have
sent us, it profiteth us nothing. Deign then to send us
interpreters, such (among you) as (from early youth)
have been accurately trained m the languages of both
Hebrews and Greeks."
1 Or " heirlooms."
2 Or "in accordance with a vow of piety." Text uncertain.
" Ccntrast p. 1 ro above.
• Ecclus. xx. 30 with Cant. iv. 12 LXX.
APPENDIX II5
Then the doctors of the Hebrews selected and sent
the seventy-two translators (before mentioned), following
the example of what Moses did aforetime, when he went
up into the mount by command of the Lord and heard
tlu t'njunchon, " Take with thee seventy men and go up
into the mount." 1 But this man,2 to ·preserve peace
between the tribes, lest, if he took five men from some
and six from others, he should create faction among
them, devised rather to take seventy-two and to add to
the number. In the self-same manner then, as I said,
they despatched these men also, who translated the books
in the Pharian island so called, as we have related above.
And so the books were rendered into Greek and deposited
in the first library which was built in the Bruchium. . . .
l
After a reference to the daughter library in the Sera
peum and the succession of the Ptolemies the Syriac
adds:-]
(It was in the days of Ptolemy Philadelphus, in his
seventh year, more or less, that the aforesaid seventy-two
interpreters translated the books.)
(17)
JEROME.
(a) Preface to the Pentateuch.
I know not who was the first lying author to construct
the seventy cells at Alexandria, in which they were
separated and yet all wrote the same words, whereas
Aristeas, one of the bodyguard 3 of the said Ptolemy,
and long after him Josephus have said nothing of the
sort, but write that they were assembled in a single hall 1
and conferred together,5 not that they prophesied. For
1 Exod. xxiv. 1 (paraphrased).
' Or "he" ; i. e. the Chief Rabbi.
• Jerome uses the Greek word hyperas;istes.
' Lat. "basilica,~• G C::f. Arht. § 302,
II6 APPENDIX
it is one thing to be a prophet, another to be an
interpreter.
(b) Commentary on Ezekiel, II. 5 (Ezek. v. 12).
Yet Aristeas and Josephus and the whole Jewish school
assert that only the five books of Moses were translated
by the Seventy.
[Notwithstanding Jerome's sane criticism above, not
many years later Augustine, in his De civitate dei: XVIII.
42, is found repeating the legend of the separate cells
and the miraculous consensus of the inspired translators.
He adds one noteworthy remark, viz. that "the custom
has now become prevalent of calling their translation the
Septuagint."]
LIST OF THE PTOLEMIES
B.C.
Ptolemy I, Soter 305-285
Ptolemy II, Philadelphns 285-247
Ptolemy III, Euergetes 247-222
Ptolemy IV, Philopator 222-205
1:'tolemy V, Epiphanes 205-182
Ptolemy VI, Enpator 182
Ptolemy VII, Philometor 182-146
Ptolemy,,VII I, Philopator N eos 146
Ptolemy IX, Euergetes II or l'hyskon 146-117
Cleopatra III and her sons- I
f
Ptolemy X, Philometor II or Soter II or
Lathyrus, and 117-81
Ptolemy XI, Alexander
Berenike III and } 81
Ptolemy XII, Alexander II
Ptolemy XIII, Auletes . 81-52
Cleopatra VI, her brothers Ptolemy X lY and}
5
Ptolemy XV and her son c~sarion i-3o
NoTE on page 90 (7)
(Contributed by Canon Box)
"THERE seems to be a mixtl\l"e here of older and
later halakot!t. It seems to me that in its original form
the passage referred merely to script, not to language.
In this case, 'nor in the Median language nor in Greek '
will be a later addition, unless these words refer to script.
It is interesting to notice that 'in any tongue' is omitted
in the best texts. Thus in its original form it would
have run probably:-
"' The Law must not be written in ordinary (old)
Hebrew script nor in Aramaic (Syriac) script [ nor in the
Median (v.I. "Elamitic ") language nor in the Greek
language]. A copy written [in any foreign tongue or] in
any foreign characters (reading C\::ui~) shall not be used
in the service, but only one written in the Assyrian
characters.'
"It is curious to note that in Megilla 18a a reference
is made to the book of Esther being read in ' Elamitic.' "
PRINTED lN G[UtAT BRITAIN .BY
RlCHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
BRUNSWICK ST.1 STAMPO'RD ST,1 S,B. 11
AND BUNGAY, 'SUFFOLK.